---
layout: post
title: Background to 1 Thessalonians
category: posts
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Tony Merida's Bible Exposition class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

What is commonly known as *Paul's First Epistle to the Thessalonians* was actually sent by Paul, Silvanus (a.k.a. Silas), and Timothy. Paul needs no introduction and much is known about Timothy from his interaction with Paul throughout the New Testament, especially in Acts and 1 & 2 Timothy. Timothy was part of Paul's apostolic band of missionaries and church planters and eventually was sent as the apostolic delegate to the church at Ephesus. Silvanus had a significant role in the early church as well. He penned 1 Peter, was regarded by Peter as a "faithful brother" (1 Pet. 5:12), and was considered a leader among the brethren in Jerusalem (Acts 15:22). Silvanus participated in missionary journeys as well, including trips to Antioch, Philippi, Thessalonica, and Corinth. 

Likely penned by AD 50,[^1] this epistle was written after Paul et al. had already boldly declared "the gospel of God in the midst of much conflict" to the Thessalonians (2:2). As detailed in Acts, Paul taught in the Thessalonian synagogues "that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead" (Acts 17:4). However, Paul was torn away from them "for a short time" due to persecution and he eagerly desired to return to Thessalonica (2:17, cf. Acts 17:5--10). While Paul was away, he was able to send Timothy to "establish and exhort" the Thessalonians in their faith (3:1) and Timothy returned with a report of the Thessalonians' reciprocal desire to see Paul et al. (3:6). After receiving Timothy’s report from Thessalonica, Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy wrote the epistle in view, 1st Thessalonians.

[^1]: Gordon Fee, *The First and Second Letters to the Thessalonians*, New International Commentary on the New Testament (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2009), 5.

Through all of this, it is clear that the Thessalonians had incurred great suffering and trials on account of their faith. Even prior to their preaching in Thessalonica, Paul et al. suffered and were shamefully treated at Philippi (2:2, cf. Acts 16). While the gospel came in word and "also in power and in the Holy Spirit and with full conviction," the Thessalonians "received the word in much affliction, with the joy of the Holy Spirit" (1:5--6). The Thessalonians were persecuted by their own countrymen in the same manner as the Christians in Judea were persecuted by the Jews (2:14). Paul and Silvanus were run out of Thessalonica themselves after their host home was attacked by a mob (Acts 17:5--10). Indeed, Timothy was sent so that Paul could learn about the Thessalonians’ faith because he knew that they were suffering affliction and he wanted to be sure that the tempter had not successfully tempted them into turning from the gospel (3:4--5). 

In light of the afflictions both Paul and the Thessalonians were experiencing, Paul desired that the Thessalonians would "abound in love" and be established "blameless in holiness" (3:12--13). He encouraged them to grow in sanctification by walking and pleasing God more and more (4:1--3). Specifically, he strongly exhorted the Thessalonians to "abstain from sexual immorality," which is the major corrective Paul offered in his letter (4:3--8). Otherwise, the Thessalonians seem to have suffered well and excelled in brotherly love (4:9). In light of the persecution, Paul encouraged the Thessalonians with the good news of the Christ's future return and the resurrection of the dead (4:13--18). Paul et al. closed their letter with final admonitions for the Thessalonians to obey the Lord.

Paul's letter to the Thessalonians thematically focuses on suffering for the sake of Christ, offering encouragement for present suffering and providing hope in the future resurrection. This epistle is altogether encouraging, despite a strong corrective regarding sanctification and sexual immorality. The love of Paul et al. for the Thessalonians overflows in this letter, making it clear that the writers receive great joy in their continued faith, despite persecution. 
