---
layout: post
title: Three Views of Church Government
category: posts
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Stephen Eccher's Christian Theology III class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

Three broad categories of church government exist today: Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Congregational. The episcopal structure, which is seen today in the Catholic, Anglican, and Methodist churches, is rooted in the concept of apostolic succession; bishops beget bishops. Furthermore, individual bishops oversee multiple congregations. Depending on the size of the denomination, there may be multiple levels of single bishops ruling over regions. At the lowest level, a single bishop oversees multiple churches, which are each led by a single priest or minister. This role of bishop is distinct from the role of a priest (or elder). However, this distinction cannot be maintained in the New Testament usage of *presbuteros* and *episkopos*. The Episcopal structure is hierarchical with all authority coming from the top. This maintains a strong divide both between bishops and priests and between clergy and laity. The Episcopal structure is rooted in history (as early as Ignatius) and has tenuous biblical support, at best.

The Presbyterian structure is also hierarchical, but is quite distinct from the Episcopal form. An individual church is led by a session of elders, which are elected or selected of both laity and staff. However, there is a sharp contrast between ruling elders and teaching elders (based on an errant interpretation of 1 Timothy 5:17). Representative elders from the Session are elected to participate in the regional Presbytery. From the Presbytery, elders are elected to participate in the larger Synod and, ultimately, the national General Assembly. Although this structure is hierarchical, the approach is more republican than dictatorial; the churches select their own elders. Because of the republican structure and the existence of lay elders, there is less of a divide between clergy and laity than found in the Episcopal structure. Also, the Presbyterian form maintains the biblical view of multiple elders in a local church. Unfortunately, the Presbyterian hierarchy does not have a clear biblical precedent and was born out of a specific historical context.

The Congregational form of church government maintains the priesthood of all believers and grants all members (in good standing) equal authority in the governing of the church. This affirmation lessens the distinction between clergy and laity, especially when laity are able to serve as elders. While this form includes multiple views of the number of individuals called to church offices, it is agreed the congregation has governing rule and the ministers are called to be servant leaders. Within a congregational structure, the local church is autonomous, under the headship of Christ. The other views of church government seem to place institutions at the head of the church; rather, it is Jesus alone who is head. Most healthy congregational churches choose to associate themselves with like-minded churches for the sake of unified Christian ministry. However, these associations are never hierarchical in structure and an individual church participates voluntarily. Congregationalism assumes a regenerate church membership and begins to fail when unregenerate people are voting members of a congregation. Further dangers are congregationalism in name only, in which a pastoral team is overbearing or the congregation is lazy in their governance. Congregationalism is supported multiple times throughout the New Testament. In Acts, the Antiochene church body sent out missionaries and the Jerusalem church participated in the great Gentile debate. Jesus taught that the church is the final arbiter in church discipline (Matthew 19). Paul commanded the Corinthian church to cast out to Satan an immoral member (1 Corinthians 5). Finally, Paul instructed Timothy that the church has the authority to bring charges of immorality against elders (I Timothy 5). Pragmatically, congregational churches are more likely to have evangelistic, committed members because of their elevation as priests and equal standing in the church.

Personally, I affirm the congregational model with several distinctions. While I do not affirm the Presbyterian split between ruling and teaching elders, I agree with the Presbyterian affirmation of multiple elders in a church and a mix of vocational and lay elders. In a congregational context, these elders must be male servant leaders and under-shepherds of Christ’s church. They must lead the church with the vision God has granted them, but must not rule over the church. With multiple elders in place, I also affirm a mixed-gender office of deacon, which serves the needs of the church in ways that free the elders for pastoring, teaching, and directing. Regarding relationships with other churches, I prefer an associational model in which churches are voluntarily mutually submissive toward one another, quick to work together and also receive loving critique. A local church is a true church, but it does not exist in isolation from its sister churches or the universal church. Thankfully, the SBC provides a context in which my personal view of church polity is both acceptable and possible.
