---
layout: post
title: Worship Matters
category: reviews
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Joshua Waggener's Ministry of Worship class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

*Worship Matters: Leading Others to Encounter the Greatness of God*. By Bob Kauflin. Wheaton: Crossway, 2008, 260 pp., $8.99 Kindle.

*Worship Matters* may be Bob Kauflin's first book, but it was birthed from years of experience. As a 30-year veteran in worship ministry, Kauflin's hard-learned lessons flow through his text, offering helpful lessons to his fellow worship leaders. Throughout the book, Kauflin prioritizes God over man, Word over music, right approach over emotionalism, and heart over skill. Kauflin's thrust is on proper theology, not pragmatism. For example, he frequently quotes weighty theologians, such as D. A. Carson and John Stott. Indeed, as the title suggests, Kauflin's thesis reads:

> Worship matters. It matters to God because he is the one ultimately worthy of all worship. It matters to us because worshiping God is the reason for which we were created. And it matters to every worship leader, because we have no greater privilege than leading others to encounter the greatness of God. That's why it's so important to think carefully about what we do and why we do it (p. 20).

Kauflin's target audience is clearly the worship leader. Much of the practical advice within this text is directed at the leader himself. However, the theology and methodology presented by Kauflin is largely beneficial to any pastor, regardless of his explicit role in music ministry. *Worship Matters* begins by focusing on the proper qualities of a worship leader. A worship leader must love and prioritize God, not his own success or fame. He ought to know the Word and understand theological doctrines. He is musically skilled, however, Kauflin does well to emphasize that any gifting is for the glory of God, not the glorification of self. "Rightly understood and pursued, skill can mark the difference between ineffectiveness and fruitfulness in our leading. It can contribute to, or hinder people from, engaging with God. That's why we should make it a priority" (p. 34). Most importantly, the author stresses the importance of the worship leader modeling the Christian life. Kauflin will repeat the theme of the holistic nature of worship leadership throughout the book.

"A faithful worship leader magnifies the greatness of God in Jesus Christ through the power of the Holy Spirit by skillfully combining God's Word with music, thereby motivating the gathered church to proclaim the gospel, to cherish God's presence, and to live for God's glory" (p. 56). Kauflin's defined task of the worship leader shows the priority the author places on God in the act of worship. Indeed, "Biblical worship is God-focused (God is clearly seen), God-centered (God is clearly the priority), and God-exalting (God is clearly honored)" (p. 177). "Faithful [worship] leadership is knowing we've pleased the audience of One" (p. 60). Gladly, Kauflin spends much time emphasizing the whole of the Trinity in worship: God engenders our worship, Christ enables our worship, and the Spirit empowers our worship. Much of the author's theological focus in this book lies in his exposition of the task of the worship leader.

Kauflin follows three principles for ordering services: "1) Do what God clearly commands. 2) Don't do what God clearly forbids. 3) Use scriptural wisdom for everything else" (p 155). Because of the fairly open nature of these principles, the author has identified some tensions in modern worship leadership. One tension can be found in God's transcendence and immanence, i.e., worshiping a sovereign King who has also adopted us as his children. Other tensions are rooted in Kauflin's mature experience in charismatic, contemporary musical worship. He considers the tension of internal worship and external expression: "Singing, shouting, dancing, lifting hands, bowing, kneeling—all these and others can honor God when done from the heart as an expression of gratefulness for God's grace. … However, physical expressiveness alone is no sure sign that biblical worship is happening" (p. 171). Given the author's musical talent, his treatment of the tension between skill and authenticity is significant. The temptation for prioritizing skill over a worshipful heart is dangerous, because "taken to the extreme, an emphasis on skill and excellence can drift toward arrogance, formalism, and art worship" (p. 196). Finally, Kauflin identified one of the great tensions of today: being both culturally relevant and historically rooted. He provides much insight confessing, "I never want to forget that my generation isn't the first to think about and pursue biblical worship" (p. 189).

Kauflin's final reflections pertain to relating rightly to people as a worship leader, clearly demonstrating the author's pastoral heart in worship ministry. He offers wisdom in relating properly to the musical team, the pastor of a church, and the church at large. Despite his clear pastoral nature and role, Kauflin often makes unfortunate dichotomies between the worship leader and "the pastor." Even though he is in a multiple-elder church, he consistently refers to a single pastor as the person "in charge" of the church and the worship. Problematically, Kauflin even refers to the pastor as "the guy I work for" (p. 242). This is despite his acknowledgement, "As a [worship] leader, you provide oversight for the team not only musically but spiritually" (p. 230). Kauflin's communication of the relationship between worship leader and pastor is particularly baffling, because (as of the book's writing) he has spent twenty years functioning "both as a corporate worship leader and as a pastor" (p. 250). Kauflin is clearly pastoral in his church and his writing—it would be wonderful if the pastoral role of the worship leader were better communicated through this text.

Another critique for this book includes its disparate views of musical worship in churches of varying sizes. Although the author does not explicitly state that a certain church-size is better, it certainly seems to be implied. For example, Kauflin writes, "The bigger your church, the more critical consistent planning and rehearsal become. But even when you're small, it's wise to develop the practice of planning" (p. 182). Consider also his statements, "I'm incredibly blessed to be in a large church where many gifted servants are eager to help out in whatever ways they can" (p. 215), and "A guitar player who can serve a church of seventy-five may not be your best choice once the church has grown to five hundred" (p. 239). Finally, the author seems to  misunderstand the temptation to "minimize spiritual maturity for the sake of musical excellence" (p. 231). Smaller churches must fight the temptation as much as larger churches—especially when the church lacks the musical skill for certain instrumentation. 

Thankfully, Kauflin's contributions to worship ministry far outweigh any warranted critiques. Repeatedly, he emphasizes the importance of Scripture and lyrics over musical instrumentation, noting, "If the words on the page are theologically shallow or vague, music won't add anything. It will only give the illusion that the words are actually substantive" (p. 93). Kauflin even calls for an increase in the public reading of Scripture. 

The author provides appropriate focus on the importance of congregational singing in which it is important that "the sound of the musicians shouldn't dominate or overpower the congregation. In the New Testament the predominant sound throughout the meeting is the singing of the congregation. They are the real worship team" (p. 102). Kauflin's corrective toward congregational singing is particularly striking considering his church's choice of musical style and instrumentation, although all churches would do well to heed his warning. Another corrective which is well suited for those in Kauflin's charismatic background is his critique of emotionalism. While Kauflin strongly affirms emotions in worship, he warns that "emotionalism can also view heightened emotions as the infallible sign that God is present" (p. 99). 

Finally, Kauflin's work emphasizes important themes for all churches. As noted above, the author makes much of theology and doctrine in the church, which "rank fairly low on the popularity scale these days. But biblical worship is impossible without them" (p. 28). Kauflin's exhortation for theologically rich songs is a necessary corrective for the church today. The author also does well to remind his readers that all churches have traditions, "whether a tradition is three hundred, thirty, or three years old" (p. 154). A dangerous temptation can be to "start with Scripture, but eventually invest ultimate authority in our own traditions or view" (p. 155). This can be especially problematic in churches which deny the validity of traditions, but unwittingly develop their own over time. Meaningful traditions which "effectively communicate God's truth" can be immensely helpful to the local church (p. 191).  In fact, Kauflin's love for the local church is demonstrable in this book. He praises Matt Redman for having "a heart for theology and a deep love for his local church" (p. 58) and even proclaims for himself that "nothing compares with leading worship in my local church" (p. 126). Kauflin's demonstration of his pastoral love for his local church is perhaps the most significant implicit contribution he makes in *Worship Matters*.

Bob Kauflin has blessed many through his years of worship leadership and continues to bless others through the publishing of this book. He deserves much credit for holding in tension many difficult and nuanced positions. His experience, maturity, and wisdom are poured onto every page of *Worship Matters*. Anyone who believes that worship matters in the local church will benefit greatly from this book.
