---
layout: post
title: The Perfect Law
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Biblical Hermeneutics class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

<cite class="bibleref" title="Psalm 19">Psalm 19</cite> is a Psalm of David intended to be sung in community for the ages. The Psalmist first marvels at the creation of God, reveling in its revelation of God to man. The Psalmist wonders at the majesty of law of the LORD and God's self-revelation through his precepts. The Psalmist ends with an expression of need for forgiveness and a plea for help in keeping from sin.

In <cite class="bibleref" title="Romans 1">Romans 1</cite>, Paul argues that the knowledge revealed in creation is adequate for men to be held accountable for their rejection of the Creator God. Psalm 19:3-4 teaches that the knowledge-revealing voice of creation is heard throughout all the earth. In <cite class="bibleref" title="Romans 10">Romans 10</cite>, Paul quotes Psalm 19:4 to explain that all people have heard the voice of creation, but have not understood and remain ignorant. Therefore, the magnificence of creation reveals knowledge of God, by which all men are held accountable to worship God (cf. Psalm 50:6).

From this reveling in the knowledge of God revealed through creation, the Psalmist moves on to rejoice in the revealed law of the LORD (<cite class="bibleref" title="Psalm 19:7">v. 7</cite>). The Psalmist declares the perfection, purity, and truth of the Law and the benefits therein to those who follow the law. Returning to Romans, Paul argues that the law is holy, righteous, and good (Romans 7:12), but that the law of God wages war against the law of the mind and the law of sin (Romans 7:21-23). Only through Jesus Christ our Lord will one be delivered from the body of death (Romans 7:24-25) by the law of the Spirit of life (Romans 8:1-2), so that "the righteous requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us" (Romans 8:4)! What is perfect in the law is revealed through the perfect completion of the law, namely, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Paul's insight shows that the perfected, completed law of the Lord is that which has the power to revive a dead soul, make the heart rejoice, and enlighten the eyes (Psalm 19:7-8). In Psalm 19:11, the Psalmist acknowledges that the reward of the law is only obtained by keeping the law, and Paul shows in <cite class="bibleref" title="Romans 8">Romans 8</cite> that only by the sin offering of Christ Jesus can the righteousness required by the law be attributed to anyone.

The requirement to fulfill the law perfectly prompts the Psalmist to ask for forgiveness from his hidden faults, which are indiscernible (Psalm 19:12, cf. Psalm 40:12, 90:8). He continues to entreat God to keep him from committing overt sins as well, that they may not have dominion over him, so that he may be innocent of *great* transgression (Psalm 19:13, emphasis added). In these two verses (vv. <cite class="bibleref" title="Psalm 19:12-13">12-13</cite>), the Psalmist acknowledges his inability to see all of his sin, and his great need of help to keep from major transgressions. The Psalmist can only be blameless and innocent (<cite class="bibleref" title="Psalm 19:18">v. 18</cite>) if he is *declared* innocent (<cite class="bibleref" title="Psalm 19:17">v. 17</cite>) by the righteousness of another, namely, Christ Jesus (Romans 8:4). The Psalmist ends this passage in doxology, praying that his heart and mind might be acceptable to God, who is his rock and necessary redeemer.

With Paul's insights in mind (<cite class="bibleref" title="Romans 7-8">Romans 7-8</cite>), <cite class="bibleref" title="Psalm 19">Psalm 19</cite> is significant because it shows that the glory of God in creation has revealed the knowledge of God to all people who are thus required to fulfill God's good and perfect law. However, no man has the ability to be perfect in accordance with the law and must be forgiven and made righteous by the righteousness of the God-man who fulfilled the law perfectly and completely, the Lord Jesus Christ.
