---
layout: post
title: Growing in Holiness
category: lessons
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Tony Merida's Bible Exposition class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

# Introduction

Howdy! It's a privilege to stand here before you today and I am glad that each one of you is here. If you are a Christian, I pray the Spirit would convict you in the areas of holiness which need particular work in your life and that he would enable you to obey all the commands of Jesus. If you are not yet a believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, I pray that your eyes would be opened, your mind would be renewed, and your heart would be transformed to know the glorious truth of the Good News of Jesus Christ.

## Sexual Immorality Today

Everyone, consider with me the pervasive nature of sexual immorality in our current culture. Please don't use this as an exercise in remembering the "good  ol' days" of yesteryear, but rather focus on the depths of sexual promiscuity, infidelity, unchastity, and perversion by which we are all surrounded, and of which many of us are partakers at one level or another. We could quickly think of sexually inappropriate advertisements, television shows, movies, and magazines. Many of us know of sexual immodesty in public places, whether at the mall or the pool.  Too many of us are familiar with the devastating effects of adultery and pre-marital relations. Politically, we see sexual immorality being promoted at all levels of society, whether it is attempting to redefine marriage, allowing polygamy, promoting pedophilia, or ignoring cases of bestiality. Our society has rejected an ethic of sexual chastity, that is, celibacy outside of marriage and fidelity within marriage, and replaced it with a therapeutic ethic of sexual activity, that is, we should all be allowed to pursue those sexual relationships that make us feel "good."

Perhaps the most pervasive and pernicious problem in our society's version of sexual morality is pornography. Some in this room grew up at a time when pornography was a difficult product to acquire, especially for a young person. Access to pornography required a physical product, which had to be purchased from a store, by an adult. Those who had a temptation toward pornography were sometimes shamed from purchasing it because of the personal nature of the transaction. Youth could only acquire access illicitly, by sneaking or borrowing products from parents or siblings and sharing it with friends.  However, starting two decades ago, that limited level of access has changed.

Having grown up during the popularization of the internet and being a technologist myself, I am personally aware of the pervasive nature of the threat of pornography. For those who are unaware of the pervasiveness, hear this: you will be hard-pressed to find a male born after 1980 who has not struggled with pornography at some point in his life. Furthermore, girls and women are becoming exposed to pornography at threatening levels as well. 

Consider this article I read a few ago weeks from the UK's *Daily Mail*, entitled, "Experiment that convinced me online porn is the most pernicious threat facing children today," by Martin Daubney.[^DM] Daubney is himself a former soft-pornographic editor who was shocked at what he found to be the result of instantly accessible pornography over the internet, via our computers, tablets, and phones. In an interview conducted with 13--14 year-old students, a sexual education consultant "asked the children to write an A--Z list of the sexual terms they knew, no matter how extreme" in order "to establish what these kids knew about sex---including pornography." Unfortunately, "it turned out that the children's extensive knowledge of porn terms was not only startling, it superseded that of every adult in the room---including the sex education consultant himself." 

"[The author] asked the teenagers: 'On a scale of one to ten, how likely would you say it is that boys and girls your age are watching porn online?' The reply was a chorus of tens, nines and one eight. When [he] asked the children if there were parental controls on the internet at home, they all said no, their parents trusted them. They all admitted their parents had no idea what they were watching, and would be shocked if they did know." Ultimately, the author concludes, "I feel as if an entire generation's sexuality has been hijacked by grotesque online porn."

[^DM]: All quotes below are from Martin Daubney, "Experiment that convinced me online porn is the most pernicious threat facing children today," *Daily Mail*, September 25, 2013, accessed October 21, 2013, <http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2432591>.

Unfortunately, what this article misses is how long instantaneous access to pornography has been a problem and how that affects multiple generations, not just our children. Quickly, for one final example I must mention the influx in the popularity of romance novels, including *Fifty Shades of Grey*. Just like internet pornography, the popularity of this literary immorality is increasing because more people have private access to the material via the e-reader of their choice.

What I want you to understand is that our society, and, unfortunately, including many Christians, is filled with sexual immorality. The text we are going to consider today was written to Christians trying to live holy lives within a society that also embraced sexual immorality. As you will hear, this text is as significant to us today as it was to its original audience nearly 2000 years ago.

## Background

Since this sermon is not part of a series, and we are parachuting into the middle of the text, allow me to provide a bit of background information to this passage. What is commonly known as *Paul's First Epistle to the Thessalonians* was actually sent by Paul, Timothy, and Silvanus (a.k.a. Silas). The apostle Paul needs no introduction here and much is known about Timothy from his interaction with Paul throughout the New Testament, especially in Acts and 1st & 2nd Timothy. Timothy was part of Paul's apostolic band of missionaries and church planters and eventually was sent as the apostolic delegate to the church at Ephesus. Silvanus had a significant role in the early church as well. He transcribed 1st Peter, was regarded by Peter as a "faithful brother" (1 Pet. 5:12), and was considered a leader among the brethren in Jerusalem (Acts 15:22). Silvanus participated in missionary journeys as well, including trips to Antioch, Philippi, Thessalonica, and Corinth. 

Likely penned by AD 50,[^Fee] 1st Thessalonians was written after Paul et al. had already boldly declared "the gospel of God in the midst of much conflict" to the Thessalonians (2:2). As detailed in Acts 17, Paul taught in the Thessalonian synagogues "that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead" (Acts 17:4). However, Paul was torn away from them "for a short time" due to persecution and he eagerly desired to return to Thessalonica (2:17, cf. Acts 17:5--10). While Paul was away, he was able to send Timothy to "establish and exhort" the Thessalonians in their faith (3:1) and Timothy to Paul returned with a report of the Thessalonians' reciprocal desire to see the apostle. (3:6). After receiving Timothy’s report from Thessalonica, Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy wrote the epistle in view, 1st Thessalonians.

[^Fee]: Gordon Fee, *The First and Second Letters to the Thessalonians*, New International Commentary on the New Testament (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2009), 5.

Through all of this, it is clear that the Thessalonians had incurred great suffering and trials on account of their faith. Even prior to preaching in Thessalonica, Paul et al. suffered and were shamefully treated at Philippi (2:2, cf. Acts 16). While the gospel came in word and "also in power and in the Holy Spirit and with full conviction," the Thessalonians "received the word in much affliction, with the joy of the Holy Spirit" (1:5--6). Their own countrymen persecuted the Thessalonians in the same manner as the Jews persecuted the Christians in Judea (2:14). Paul and Silvanus themselves were then run out of Thessalonica after their host home was attacked by a mob (Acts 17:5--10). Indeed, Timothy was sent back to Thessalonica so that Paul could learn about the Thessalonians’ faith because he knew that they were suffering affliction and he wanted to be sure that the tempter, the devil, had not successfully tempted them into turning from the gospel (3:4--5). 

In light of the afflictions both Paul and the Thessalonians were experiencing, Paul desired that the Thessalonians would "abound in love" and be established "blameless in holiness" (3:12--13). He encouraged them to grow in sanctification by walking and pleasing God more and more (4:1--3). Specifically, he strongly exhorted the Thessalonians to "abstain from sexual immorality," which is the major corrective Paul offered in his letter (4:3--8). Otherwise, the Thessalonians seem to have suffered well and excelled in brotherly love (4:9). In light of the persecution, Paul encouraged the Thessalonians with the good news of the Christ's future return and the resurrection of the dead (4:13--18). Paul et al. closed their letter with final admonitions for the Thessalonians to obey the Lord.

Paul's letter to the Thessalonians thematically focuses on suffering for the sake of Christ, offering encouragement for present suffering and providing hope in the future resurrection. This epistle is altogether encouraging, despite a strong corrective regarding sanctification and sexual immorality. The love of Paul et al. for the Thessalonians overflows in this letter, making it clear that the writers receive great joy in their continued faith, despite persecution. 

## Textual Introduction

If you would, please go ahead and turn your Bibles to our selected text, 1 Thessalonians 4:1--8. If you are unfamiliar with our practices: as Christians, we study the Bible, which we know to be God's Word revealed to us. First to note, there is a table of contents in the front of your Bible; this will be a lifeline to finding the texts we discuss today. You can see from there that the Bible is broken into two testaments: the Old Testament, which presents the faith of our Jewish forbears pointing to the incarnation, the birth, of Jesus Christ, and the New Testament, which testifies to Christ's life, death, and resurrection, and the early history and theology of the church. Our text today, again, comes from 1 Thessalonians, which is a New Testament letter written by the apostle Paul and his companions to the church they had recently started in Thessalonica. This book is one of the middle books of the New Testament and can be found after Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians. Each book of the Bible is broken down into chapter and verse numbers for our aid in finding specific texts. The big numbers in your Bible represent the chapters and the little numbers show the verses. Again, our text today is, 1 Thessalonians, chapter 4, verses 1 through 8.

From the translation of the English Standard Version, this passage reads:

> Finally, then, brothers, we ask and urge you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received from us how you ought to walk and to please God, just as you are doing, that you do so more and more. For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus. For this is the will of God, your sanctification: that you abstain from sexual immorality; that each one of you know how to control his own body in holiness and honor, not in the passion of lust like the Gentiles who do not know God; that no one transgress and wrong his brother in this matter, because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as we told you beforehand and solemnly warned you. For God has not called us for impurity, but in holiness. Therefore whoever disregards this, disregards not man but God, who gives his Holy Spirit to you. (1 Thessalonians 4:1-8, ESV)

As you can see from the text, Paul urged the Thessalonians to please God by obeying Jesus in matters of sanctification, especially sexual morality. As you have heard me say before, we have as much need for this word as the Thessalonians did two millennia ago. Dear Christian, if you leave today remembering only one sentence, let it be this: "regarding all matters of holiness, but especially sexual morality, you ought to please God by growing in obedience to Jesus' commands through the gift of the Holy Spirit." Again, "Dear Christian, regarding all matters of holiness, but especially sexual morality, you ought to please God by growing in obedience to Jesus' commands through the gift of the Holy Spirit."

Let's get started.

## Sermon Introduction

Here is the main point of the text we just read: "Paul urged the Thessalonians to please God by obeying Jesus in matters of sanctification, especially sexual morality." Again, "Paul urged the Thessalonians to please God by obeying Jesus in matters of sanctification, especially sexual morality." As that is the main point of the text, I want you to hear again the main point of this sermon: "Dear Christian, regarding all matters of holiness, but especially sexual morality, you ought to please God by growing in obedience to Jesus' commands through the gift of the Holy Spirit." I am going to continue to repeat this main point throughout the sermon, therefore, learn it, know it, believe it, and obey it.

I have titled this sermon, "Growing in Holiness", because Paul is encouraging the Thessalonians, that just as they are already walking and pleasing God, they should do so more and more. This simple phrase, "more and more" is what makes the text applicable to everyone! Are you already mature and following Christ in a God-honoring way? Then you are urged by Paul to continue in that and grow in it, to do it more and more. Are you immature in your faith and have struggle in obedience in some areas of your life? Paul calls you to grow in your obedience, as you are already obeying Christ in some areas, and to make sure you obey in all areas. Are you not a Christian? Do you believe that Christ's command have to command on your life? Although it is impossible for man to grow something from nothing, the God who created the whole universe out of nothing can surely create in you a heart of faith, from which you can begin to obey and thereafter, do so more and more. No matter where we are in our walk of holiness, Paul's exhortation stands: Grow in holiness and therefore please God.

I want you to be aware of three theological points about growing in holiness as we walk through this text. (1) Growing in holiness is pleasing to God. Again, Growing in holiness is pleasing to God. (2) Growing in holiness is obeying Jesus' commands, more and more. Growing in holiness is obeying Jesus' commands, more and more. (3) Growing in holiness is empowered by the Holy Spirit. Growing in holiness is empowered by the Holy Spirit. While the majority of the text will fall under point 2 concerning obeying Jesus' commands, we cannot succeed in point two without understanding our motivation to obey by pleasing God and our empowerment to obey by the indwelling Spirit. Furthermore, I want you to see the Trinitarian view presented in the text and, therefore, how the entire Triune Godhead works in our personal growth in holiness. 

# Exegesis

## 1. Growing in holiness is pleasing to God.

Let's read verses 1 again, "Finally, then, brothers, we ask and urge you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received from us how you ought to walk and to please God, just as you are doing, that you do so more and more." First, let's jump to the middle of the verse and consider the phrase, "to please God." How is it that the Thessalonians ought to please God? According to Paul, it is by walking in the manner they received from Paul and co. during their missionary journey. And where did Paul receive his instructions? Let's look at verse 2, "For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus." The Thessalonians received their instructions from Paul and Paul received his instructions from the Lord Jesus. Therefore, God is pleased when one walks according to the instructions of Jesus himself. God's good pleasure ought to motivate us to walk according to the instructions of Christ. 

However, everyone be warned: external obedience without an internal love for God and desire to please him will never be accepted as true obedience. As God said to the Jews through the prophet Hosea, "I desire steadfast love and not sacrifice, the knowledge of God rather than burnt offerings" (6:6). Indeed, I make a distinction between external obedience and actual obedience because God demands our love. Consider this from Matthew 22:36--40: when Jesus was asked, 

> "'Teacher, which is the great commandment in the Law?' And he said to him, 'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment. And a second is like it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments depend all the Law and the Prophets.'"

God is pleased by our growth in sanctification, by our obedience to Christ. However, this obedience must include our personal love and devotion to our great God and King. Take parenting as an illustration: imagine that you parent a child who is perfectly obedient. However, this perfect child, the one you bore and parent, hates you in his heart. He keeps his room perfectly clean, but in his heart he is counting the days until he can leave the house and be rid of your influence in his life. Does this sound like true obedience to you? Would you be satisfied in this external obedience? I'm sure your answer is "no," and that is God's answer as well. As John Stott wrote, 

> Pleasing God is a radical concept, for it strikes at the roots of our discipleship and challenges the reality of our profession. How can we claim to know and to love God if we do not seek to please him? Disobedience is ruled out. . . . If our goal is to be perfectly pleasing to God, we shall never be able to claim that we have arrived. Instead we are summoned to please him more and more.[^1-Stott]

[^1-Stott]: Stott, 79.

I'd like to make another parenting illustration to support a different point about growing in holiness. I have a three-year old daughter. I love my daughter and am pleased by the obedience she is capable of as a person in a three-year old body with a three-year old mind. However, I also expect her to grow in obedience and ability as she matures into an older child. I would be greatly dissatisfied in four years if her obedience then looks just as it does today. As a child, she will not satisfy the expectation of her parents without a growth in understanding and obedience. I believe God has a similar desire for Christians who are obeying him. He does not seem to expect perfection of his new children, but does expect them to continually grow in obedience to him. Not being perfect is still sinful, but if we all look around, we know that not one of us has yet attained perfection. While there is no license for sin, there is forgiveness of sins through the blood of Christ who offered himself as a perfect sacrifice on our behalf. As one commentator wrote, "We have been called, regenerated, forgiven, and adopted. The Biblical ethic is that we are now called to live like that. In other words, we are called to become what we already are in Christ."[^1-Grant]

[^1-Grant]: Grant, 90.

Dear Christian, regarding all matters of holiness, but especially sexual morality, you ought to please God by growing in obedience to Jesus’ commands through the gift of the Holy Spirit. 

Dear Church, remember, "Growing in holiness is pleasing to God."

## 2. Growing in holiness is obeying Jesus' commands

### Know Jesus' Commands

As we mentioned above, verses 1--2 show that we please God by walking in the way Jesus taught us through the apostles. For us today, this includes the commands we receive through Scripture as the Bible was written by prophets, apostles, and certain disciples of the apostles. Verse 2 reads, "For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus." Indeed, Paul does know what instructions he gave to the church at Thessalonica. However, dear listener, hear my question for you, "Do you know the instructions of the Lord Jesus?" Indeed, how can you please God by obeying Christ when you do not know his commands? Obviously, you can't. Here Paul assumes that his recipients know the commands of Christ; he's free to do this as he had just prior taught the commands to them. For you who want to walk and to please God, you must know the commands of Christ, therefore, you must know Scripture. 

Read the Bible. Are you reading the Scripture daily in your home? When it comes to reading, I highly recommend reading large sections of Scripture. For example, the other day I read the first twelve or so chapters of Deuteronomy in one sitting and I found that reading of the Scripture more profitable than any prior time of reading Deuteronomy. Yes, dear Christian, even Deuteronomy is a blessing to your soul.

Study the Bible. Are you studying the Scripture? Are you taking the time to understand what it means and teaches? Friends, I urge you to struggle through the Bible to discern its meaning. What does the Scripture teach on marriage and divorce? What does it teach on salvation? What does it teach about God himself? Read the Scripture and study the Scripture.

Know the Bible. Are you memorizing the Scripture? God has called us to put his word in our heart so that we may know and obey him. What better way is there to know God's word than to memorize it? You'll be amazed at how much Scripture you can learn overtime if you memorize just one verse a day. I personally recommend Andy Davis' guide to Scripture memorization and Tom Ascol's series of catechisms from Founder's Press.

I know I have spent a great deal of time on the big ideas Paul discusses in the first two verses. Have no fear, my pace will increase greatly through the next 4 verses! For those of you taking notes, we are still on sermon point 2, Growing in holiness is obeying Jesus' commands, as we will be all the way through verse 7.

### Sanctification

Verse three reads, "For this is the will of God, your sanctification: that you abstain from sexual immorality." God's will for you is that you be sanctified. Do you understand this word, "sanctified"? Sanctification and holiness are terms that have much overlap in meaning; sometimes they are synonymous. This word means personal dedication to the interests of God[^sanc-1] and can be used in a definitive sense or a progressive sense. "Definitive sanctification" is the benefit Christians receive by being counted holy as Christ is holy.[^sanc-2] This type of sanctification does not have degree, but is a position we are given before the Lord and by the Lord. However, the type of sanctification in view for verse 3, as revealed in verse 1, is termed "progressive sanctification." Progressive sanctification is "the practical outworking of this positional holiness."[^sanc-3] It is growing in holiness, growing into conformity of Christ's commands, growing into the men and women of God which God has already called us to be, growing toward the perfection of Christ which has already been imparted on us. 

Actually, let's read a quote from Kenneth Keathley in his chapter on salvation in *A Theology for the Church*: 

> Sanctification is a definitive event that has ongoing effects. The experiential aspect of sanctification is the continual process of purification, transformation, and progress that comes as a result of God taking possession of what belongs to him, i.e., the church, the people of God. Paul referred to the sanctification of the church as a progressive process when he spoke of Christ’s work to “sanctify and cleanse her with the washing of water by the word” (Eph. 5:26). The apostle made clear that this ongoing development of spiritual growth has ethical and moral implications when he exhorted the church at Thessalonica, “For this is the will of God, your sanctification: that you should abstain from sexual immorality; that each of you should know how to possess his own vessel in sanctification and honor, not in passion of lust, like the Gentiles who do not know God” (1 Thess. 4:3–5).[^sanc-4]

[^sanc-1]: BDAG, s.v., "*hagiasmos*".

[^sanc-2]: DeYoung, 27.

[^sanc-3]: Ibid.

[^sanc-4]: Kenneth Keathley, "The Work of God: Salvation" in *A Theology for the Church*, ed. Daniel Akin, 758--759.

For you who do not know Christ, God's will, first, is that you recognize the offer of salvation from sin which Christ has afforded you and look to Jesus as your Lord so that you may be made holy by his blood and sacrifice. Dear Christian, God's will is that you recognize your positional sanctification by the work of Christ and that you increasingly obey the commands of Christ, so that you grow toward functional holiness in your life. As Paul also wrote in Romans 6:22, "But now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves of God, the fruit you get leads to sanctification and its end, eternal life"!

Dear Christian, regarding all matters of holiness, but especially sexual morality, you ought to please God by growing in obedience to Jesus’ commands through the gift of the Holy Spirit. 

### Sexual Immorality

Now that you hopefully have an idea of sanctification and growing in holiness means, let's continue to the second half of verse 3, "that you abstain from sexual immorality." This introduces Paul's teaching on sexual immorality through verse 6 or 7. Although the phrase from verse 1, "just as you are doing," demonstrates that the Thessalonians were following Jesus' commands, apparently Timothy reported some need for Paul to address sexual immorality in the Thessalonian church. 

To the Thessalonians, Paul exhorted they abstain from sexual immorality. Similarly, Paul also wrote in 1 Corinthians 6:18, "Flee from sexual immorality. Every other sin a person commits is outside the body, but the sexually immoral person sins against his own body." Isn't this interesting? Sexual immorality is always a sin against one's own body, even if it doesn't involve sinning against someone else's body directly. Therefore, not only is illegitimate sex included, but also pornography and any type of private sexual activity of the body or mind. Indeed this teaching of sexual morality including the mind and eyes goes back to Jesus' Sermon on the Mount in which he said

> “You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’ But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman with lustful intent has already committed adultery with her in his heart. If your right eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. For it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body be thrown into hell. And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. For it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body go into hell." (Matthew 5:27-30, ESV)

Jesus' is pointing all the way back to the 10 commandments, which explicitly prohibited adultery and, implicitly, all types of sexual immorality. If you think this expectation for sexual morality and holiness is extreme, let's consider the civil law of Leviticus 20:10--20 in which many types of sexual immorality are listed. Notably, each prohibition ends with some variation of, "both of them shall surely be put to death; their blood is upon them." Since the beginning of creation, God has taken seriously the issue of sexual immorality.

However, in contrast to sexual immorality, keep in mind the greatness of sexual morality, that is, the right pursuit of sex within the context of covenantal marriage before God. Sexual morality calls the unmarried to celibacy, completely abstaining from sexual activity. Sexual morality calls the married to fidelity, complete faithfulness to the one marital partner. Celibacy prior to marriage ad fidelity during marriage protects the great gift of sex that God has given to humanity. It allows sex to be spiritually, physically, and emotionally edifying. On the other hand, sexual immorality will always destroy that which is good about God's gift of sex and turn the very act of sex into a curse.

Verses 4--6 all explain God's will for you to abstain from sexual immorality. Going back to verse 3, we read, 

> For this is the will of God, your sanctification: that you abstain from sexual immorality; that each one of you know how to control his own body in holiness and honor, not in the passion of lust like the Gentiles who do not know God; that no one transgress and wrong his brother in this matter, because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as we told you beforehand and solemnly warned you.

In verse 4, Paul commands you to control your own body in holiness in honor. Holiness here is the same type of word as sanctification in verse 3. Next, it is possible that Paul had in view four recipients of the honor mentioned in verse 4. (1) Clearly the use of our bodies ought to honor God, otherwise our actions could not be holy. (2) We honor those we might otherwise wrong when we control our bodies. (3) We bring honor upon our own bodies when we control it in holiness. (4) We show honor to our current or potential spouse when we abstain from all sexual immorality.

Paul here calls Christians to control their bodies in holiness and honor and contrasts that to the passion of lust of the heathen who don't know God, as we see in verse 5. Similarly, in Romans 1:24--26, Paul describes the how these unrighteous use their own bodies: 

> Therefore God gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to impurity, to the dishonoring of their bodies among themselves, because they exchanged the truth about God for a lie and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever! Amen. For this reason, God gave them up to dishonorable passions. For their women exchanged natural relations for those that are contrary to nature (Romans 1:24--26).

Those who do not know God reflect the impurity of their hearts through the sexual immorality of their bodies. Furthermore, the passion of lust begets more dishonorable passion. We know from observation that this can become a vicious cycle. Who of you are aware of the nature of pornography, that those who seek it out are always desiring something more dishonorable so that it might bring about the same lustful stimulation as before. This is the addictive nature of sexual immorality: repeating the same type of immorality is never enough; those involved will continually seek out something that brings them more pleasure, oftentimes seen as that which is more dishonorable. 

Regarding Paul's contrast between the holiness and honor of the Christian and the passion of lust of the Gentiles, Paul is also teaching that we must not establish our sexual ethic based on the mores of the culture. In Thessalonica, it was considered normal sexual behavior to take on a wife, a mistress, and concubines.  This is far from God's sexual ideal of fidelity between one husband and one wife, for life. Dear Christian, are you allowing the culture around you to define your sexual ethic? Has sex outside of marriage become acceptable to you because those around you are doing it? Has immodest dress become your norm because that is what your friends are wearing? (As a sidebar, everyone, please prayerfully consider the clothing you wear out in public, especially regarding swimwear). Has staring at Victoria's Secret ads become acceptable to you because the world keeps throwing them your way? Dear Christian, do not act like the heathen who do not know God. Do not allow them to define what is right and wrong. Submit to the teaching of God, your maker, and abstain from all kids of sexual immorality. More positively, rejoice in the good gifts of God and pursue sexual morality in as much he has granted you opportunity. Safeguard your heart, body, and soul: flee from sexual immorality.

Hear Paul again in Ephesians 4:17--24:

> Now this I say and testify in the Lord, that you must no longer walk as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their minds. They are darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them, due to their hardness of heart. They have become callous and have given themselves up to sensuality, greedy to practice every kind of impurity. But that is not the way you learned Christ!—assuming that you have heard about him and were taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus, to put off your old self, which belongs to your former manner of life and is corrupt through deceitful desires, and to be renewed in the spirit of your minds, and to put on the new self, created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness.

Verse 6 provides one last instruction followed by a serious warning, "that no one transgress and wrong his brother in this matter, because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as we told you beforehand and solemnly warned you." In so many ways, sexual immorality transgresses and wrongs others. Such sin defiles the victim of immorality, whether that is a partner in sexual activity or the object of lustful desires. Sexual immorality defiles your relationship with your current or future spouse and does the same for the victim or object of your sin. Sexual immorality is a sin you commit against God, bringing harm to yourself and whoever you transgress. The consequences of this sin is great. Dear Christian, is that what you want for others? Do you desire to transgress and defile them? If not, then you must abstain from sexual immorality.

Regarding the warning, let us take seriously Paul's words, "The Lord is an avenger in all these things." The writer of Hebrews similarly wrote in Hebrews 13:4, "Let marriage be held in honor among all, and let the marriage bed be undefiled, for God will judge the sexually immoral and adulterous." And as Paul reminds us in Romans 12:19, "Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but leave it to the wrath of God, for it is written, 'Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.'"  As Paul later writes to the Thessalonians in 2 Thessalonians 1:6--9, "God considers it just to repay with affliction those who afflict you, and to grant relief to you who are afflicted as well as us, when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire, inflicting vengeance on those who do not know God and on those who do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus. They will suffer the punishment of eternal destruction, away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might." This is the Lord Jesus who avenges those who are sexually immoral. Friends, the day of vengeance will come: by your faith and actions will you find yourself with Jesus, or will you stand against him?

Praise God all who know righteousness, for as we read in verse 7, "For God has not called us for impurity, but in holiness." Dear Christian, God has called you to be holy. Dear Christian, be holy, fulfill your calling, be an object of God's pleasure, not his wrath. Flee from immorality. Flee from impurity. Flee from the wrath to come for those who hate God and do not follow his commands. Also, beware, for the beginning of verse 8 reads, "Therefore whoever disregards this, disregards not man but God." Paul has reminded us of Jesus' commands to be sexually moral and to live holy lives, pleasing to God. Are you going to disregard this message? For if you do, you are disregarding God himself. Therefore, heed the message Paul has given to use via his letter to the Thessalonians. As Jesus said in Luke 10:16, "The one who hears you hears me, and the one who rejects you rejects me, and the one who rejects me rejects him who sent me."

Dear Christian, regarding all matters of holiness, but especially sexual morality, you ought to please God by growing in obedience to Jesus’ commands through the gift of the Holy Spirit. 

Dear Church, remember, growing in holiness is obeying Jesus' commands.

## 3. Growing in holiness is empowered by the Holy Spirit

Our final point comes from the last phrase of verse 8, "Therefore whoever disregards this, disregards not man but God, who gives his Holy Spirit to you." Now we see the entire Trinity at work in this passage. Dear Christian, God has given his Holy Spirit to you. One commentator writes,

> The promise of the OT was that God would enter into a new covenant with his people and that as part of this new alliance he would put his Spirit in their hearts so that they could walk in his statutes, a promise that has now been fulfilled. Sanctification . . . becomes a reality in believers' lives only through the agency of the Holy Spirit.[^sp-1]

[^sp-1]: Green, 201--202.

Recognize how we are describing the Spirit of God as the Holy Spirit. God is holy and he has given us his Holy Spirit so that we might live holy lives as well. To quote another commentator, "He will not allow us to remain in our sin. He will move us toward purity and maturity. He will not let us live in conformity to this world but will transform us into the likeness of Jesus Christ."[^sp-2] Dear Christian, can you imagine following the commands of Christ, even just the ones in this passage, if God didn't give his Holy Spirit to you? For you without the Holy Spirit, who do not recognize Jesus as Lord, do you not find it impossible to live the life of holiness I have described for you today? This impossibility for the non-believer and the possibility for the believer all rests upon the presence and indwelling of the Holy Spirit. We cannot live holy lives without the Holy Spirit and we ought to try to live unholy lives with the Holy Spirit, lest we reject the very God who gave us the Spirit. 

[^sp-2]: Grant, 96.

It is only by the Holy Spirit that the Christian can become, more and more, one who obeys Christ and pleases God. Now that we have considered the entire passage, humor me in listening to this fallible illustration. Imagine that you are driving your car down the road of life. Based on what we have learned about the Trinity's interaction with our holiness, perhaps you could consider your intended destination to be God's pleasure. However, there is only one route to his pleasure and you do not know the way. That's why Jesus is sitting next to you helping you navigate the road. You will find your way to God's pleasure as long as you are hearing and obeying these commands of Jesus. Finally, you might consider the Holy Spirit to be something like your headlights, enabling you to see the road before you so that you can obey the commands of Jesus and arrive at your destination of God's pleasure. Well, thanks for humoring me. Regardless of the effectiveness of that illustration, know this:

Dear Christian, regarding all matters of holiness, but especially sexual morality, you ought to please God by growing in obedience to Jesus’ commands through the gift of the Holy Spirit. 

Dear Church, remember, growing in holiness is empowered by the Holy Spirit.

# Response

For you in the audience who have yet to turn to Christ, allow me to plead with you for a moment. As it is for the Christian, the God who made you desires what is good for you, namely, knowing him. He has given us the ability to know him in many ways. First, he has revealed himself through the whole of his Scripture, the Bible, from Old Testament to New Testament. Within this revelation, he has made himself known to us as Jesus, the Son of God, who is one person in the three-person Godhead we call the Trinity. This Jesus, who is real and existed in history, was born of a virgin. He lived a perfect life, a life in which he never sinned, for he always did that which pleased his Father, who is another person in the Trinity. Jesus lived the perfect life that none of us could ever live. Not me; not you. Jesus also taught the truth about himself, that he is the Son of God, that he had come to save the world from its sins, that whoever believed in him, in Jesus, would not perish in hell, but have eternal life with God forever in heaven. Furthermore, this Jesus taught that he must suffer, die, and rise again from the dead in order to complete the war against sin, so that his followers could be counted righteous on account of his own righteousness, and so that his followers could also participate in the resurrection of the dead to the throne room of heaven when Jesus one day appears to judge the whole world.

I ask you, where will you be on that day? When the Lord judges every man for his deeds, who will represent you? Will you be able to claim before a holy God that you were perfect? That you had indeed earned your own right to be with him forever? No, you will not for no one is righteous on his own accord. Hear me, for this fact will alter your eternal life: you will either represent yourself and be judged for all of your sin and cast into an eternal, fiery hell, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, or you will be counted as righteous by the perfect sacrifice offered by Jesus on your behalf, having washed away your sin, and taken them upon himself. Will you be an object of God’s wrath in hell, eternally rejecting God and suffering in separation from all of his blessings? Or will you turn to Christ, follow him, obey his commands, receive the Holy Spirit, and become an object of pleasure for the God who made you for such a purpose? Where, O where, will you stand before the judgment of God?

Dear Christian, regarding all matters of holiness, but especially sexual morality, you ought to please God by growing in obedience to Jesus’ commands through the gift of the Holy Spirit. God has called you out of immorality, out of impurity, and into holiness, righteousness, and progressive sanctification. Dear Christian, the God of the Universe, who made all things, selected you and your Christian brethren. He removed you from your impurity and set you aside for holiness. He has protected you from his own vengeance against sin. Will you not take joy in what he has done for you? Will you not be diligent in presenting your lives as pleasing sacrifice? Will you not forsake all wickedness in an effort to please your creator?

In order to please God, you must obey Jesus’s commands. In order to obey his commands, you must know them. Dear Christian, will you not turn to the Scripture in order to know the commands of Jesus? Will you not meditate on passages in order to transformed by the renewal of your mind? Will you not memorize the Bible and so hide God’s Word in your heart, so that out of the overflow of your heart you will know and obey the commands of Christ? And most importantly, will you not grow in your own obedience to the commands you now know?

The only way we can please God by obeying Jesus’ commands is to be dependent upon the indwelling Spirit, so that by the strength of God, we can obey the will of God. Everyone hear this: we each are wholly incapable of obeying God without his strength and we only have his strength by his Spirit. Dear Christian, will you not grow in your dependence on the Holy Spirit? Will you not increase the frequency of your prayers for strength, guidance, and communion with the Lord? Will you not recognize that there is no right choice you can make without the mercy, grace, and strength of God?

---

# Bibliography

Akin, Daniel, ed. *A Theology for the Church*. Nashville: B&H, 2007.

Bauer, Walter, et al. *A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature*. 3rd ed. Revised and edited by F. W. Danker. Chicago: University of Chicago, 2000.

Bock, Darrell L. and Buist M. Fanning. *Interpreting the New Testament Text*. Wheaton: Crossway, 2006.

Bruce, F. F. *1 & 2 Thessalonians*. Word Biblical Commentary 45. Waco, TX: Word, 1982.

Daubney, Martin. "Experiment that convinced me online porn is the most pernicious threat facing children today." *Daily Mail*, September 25, 2013. Accessed October 21, 2013. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2432591.

Dever, Mark. "What You Won't Hear on Oprah" (audio). Sermon, Capitol Hill Baptist Church, Washington, D.C., March 5, 1995. Accessed September 7, 2013. http://www.capitolhillbaptist.org/audio/1995/03/what-you-wont-hear-on-oprah-1-thessalonians-41-12/.

DeYoung, Kevin. *The Hole in Our Holiness*. Good News Publishers. Kindle Edition. 

Fee, Gordon. *The First and Second Letters to the Thessalonians*. New International Commentary on the New Testament. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2009.

---------. *New Testament Exegesis*. 3rd ed. Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2002.

Gloag, P. J. *I Thessalonians*. Pulpit Commentary 21. Reprint, Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1989.

Grant, James H., Jr. *1 & 2 Thessalonians: The Hope of Salvation*. Preaching the Word. Wheaton: Crossway, 2011.

Green, Gene L. *The Letters to the Thessalonians*. Pillar New Testament Commentary. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2002.

Piper, John. “A Model of Covenant Exhortation” (transcript and audio). Sermon, Bethlehem Baptist Church, Minneapolis, MN, February 21, 1993. Accessed September 7, 2013. http://www.desiringgod.org/resource-library/sermons/a-model-of-covenant-exhortation.

Stott, John R. W. *The Message of Thessalonians*. Bible Speaks Today. Downers Grove: IVP, 1994.

Thomas, Robert L. *1 Thessalonians*. Rev. ed. Expositor's Bible Commentary 12. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2006.

Wallace, Daniel. *Greek Grammar: Beyond the Basics*. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996.