---
layout: post
title: The LORD Spares his People
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Biblical Hermeneutics class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: "What is the meaning and significance of Psalm 103?"
description: "Psalm 103 shows that the righteousness and inheritance of the perfect Son is imputed upon the frail people of God's covenant so that they may be seen by God as his own righteous children."
keywords: [exhort, covenant, soul, psalm, "Psalm 103", bless]
date: 2013-02-25T08:00-5:00
---

<cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103'>Psalm 103</cite> is primarily a song of exhortation for the covenant children of God to bless the LORD with all their soul. As the psalm declares, this blessing is motivated by all the good the LORD has done for his covenant people by showing mercy and grace to those who remember his commandments (<cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:2-14'>vv. 2-14</cite>). The Psalmist then contemplates man's finite life in comparison to the eternal LORD (<cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:15-18'>vv. 15-18</cite>). Finally, the Psalmist exhorts all of God's creation to bless the LORD because he "has established his throne in the heavens, and his kingdom rules over all" (<cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:19-22'>vv. 19-22</cite>).

The worship of the soul begins with *not forgetting* the benefits of the LORD (<cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:2'>v. 2</cite>), an exhortation often given to God's people (cf. Deuteronomy 6:12, 8:11). The benefits mentioned by the Psalmist in <cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:3-5'>vv. 3-5</cite> should be seen as works of eternal significance, e.g., the LORD forgiving all of one's iniquity (cf. Isaiah 33:24), healing all one's diseases (cf. Matthew 8:17; Isaiah 53:4), redeeming one's life from the pit (cf. Psalm 56:13), crowning one with love and mercy, satisfying one with goodness (cf. Psalm 107:9), and renewing one's youth like the eagle's (cf. Isaiah 40:31). Following this, the Psalmist remembers that the LORD brings about righteousness for the oppressed (cf. Psalm 146:7), by making known his ways to Moses and his covenant people (cf. Exodus 33:13, 34:10).

The Psalmist then dwells on the LORD's mercy and grace shown through his slowness to anger, his abundant love, and his forgiveness of sin (<cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:8-12'>vv. 8-12</cite>). Much of the Psalmist's reflection is a paraphrase of Exodus 34:6-7 in which the LORD proclaims his nature and relationship with his people as a covenant God, that he is merciful, gracious, slow to anger, and that he abounds in love and faithfulness toward his children, forgives the iniquity of the repentant, and brings justice to the guilty. <cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:9'>Verse 9</cite> adds the encouragement that the LORD will not forever chide and keep his anger (cf. Isaiah 57:16, Psalm 30:5, Jeremiah 3:12, Micah 7:18). Finally, <cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:11-12'>verses 11-12</cite> beautifully demonstrate the greatness of the covenant LORD's love for those who fear him and the depths to which he removes the iniquity of his people (cf. Ezra 9:13, Psalm 103:13, Isaiah 43:25, Micah 7:19, Luke 1:50).

The Psalmist continues in <cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:13-19'>vv. 13-19</cite> by comparing the infinite nature of God to the finite nature of mankind. The LORD shows a paternal compassion toward those who fear him (cf. Malachi 3:17), recognizing that man is dust, short-lived, and easily destroyed (vv. 14-16, cf. Psalm 78:39, Job 14:2, Isaiah 40:6-8).   While man is weak and finite, the love of the LORD is everlasting for those who keep his covenant (<cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:17-18'>vv. 17-18</cite>, cf. Deuteronomy 7:9, Psalm 25:6, Psalm 19:8). This psalm ends with a proclamation of the kingdom of God and exhorts the angels, hosts, and all creation to bless the LORD enthroned in heaven (<cite class='bibleref' title='Psalm 103:19-22'>vv. 19-22</cite>; cf. Psalm 11:4, 47:2, 93:2, 148:2; Daniel 4:17).

This psalm does well to remind one's soul to bless the LORD for all he has done for his covenant people, his children. The LORD treats his people as children in that he "[spared] them as a man spares his son who serves him" (Malachi 3:17). It is significant indeed that the benefits for which the soul rejoices in this psalm are brought about by the Son of God being a sacrifice for sins so that those who love and fear the LORD might be spared the punishment they deserve. The righteousness and inheritance of the perfect Son is imputed upon the frail people of God's covenant so that they may be seen by God as his own righteous children.
