---
layout: post
title: Sacramental Theology
category: posts
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Stephen Eccher's Christian Theology III class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

A minimalistic definition of sacrament is “a sacred thing.” This word has been used to describe many functions of the church throughout history. According to Peter Lombard (and ratified by the 4th Lateran Council in 1215AD), there are seven sacraments: Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Marriage, Ordination, and Extreme Unction. However, the Reformers tended to agree that the only sacraments (ordinances) of Christ were Baptism and the Eucharist (Lord’s Supper). The other Catholic sacraments may have been considered aspects of the Christian life, but not direct commandments of Christ, and thus not sacramental. 

An early dilemma regarding the Eucharist was in regard to who could administer the elements. Ignatius taught that apostolically ordained bishops were required to oversee the sacraments. Responding to the lapsed bishops in the Decian persecution, Cyprian contended that only morally upright bishops were permitted to oversee the sacraments. In a similar manner, the Donatists caused a controversy when they asserted that the power of the sacraments was based in the morality of the administrator (*ex opere operantis*). However, Augustine argued that the efficacy of the sacraments was in the act itself (*ex opere operato*) through the power of Christ. While the sacramental power was in Christ, only apostolically ordained priests were allowed to administer the sacraments. Augustine’s position won the debate and was also accepted as normative by the church.

What became the Catholic view of the sacraments as a means of grace received much attention during the Reformation. Prior, Ignatius wrote of the sacraments as the “medicine of immortality.” This medicinal theme was continued by Augustine who further taught that the sacraments were both “a visible form of an invisible grace,” and “a sign of a sacred thing.” By the Medieval era, these themes had formed into a sacramental appropriation of grace. Baptism washed away original sin, and the remaining sacraments were opportunities for Christians to be infused with grace. Through the priests, the church believed it held all power over which people were able to receive grace---they held the keys to the kingdom. Excommunication was equivalent to damnation because “sick” sinners would no longer have access to the medicinal sacraments of grace and would thus fall out of God’s grace. Having received this theological tradition, corrupt men in the church used sacramental theology to extract money from the (poor) parishioners via indulgences. It was this abuse of an improper sacramental theology that drove Luther to debate the papacy. On a personal level, Luther desired an assurance of salvation, and found that no assurance was found in the Catholic understanding of the sacraments. Further, Luther questioned how the Pope could have access to stores of merit, yet sell it to the poor in a money-making scheme. Why would he not give it away freely? The other Reformers followed Luther’s lead in turning from the Catholic view of the sacraments as a dispensation of grace and toward their own understanding of the sacraments.

The Reformers (generally) maintained two sacraments, Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. The Catholic practice of paedobaptism was rooted both in its view of original sin and the need to initiate people into the state. The Magisterial Reformers maintained the state requirement of baptism, but considered paedobaptism to be a mark of the covenant of grace, akin to circumcision for the Jews, not a sacramental means to grace. The Anabaptists, however, rejected paedobaptism entirely and embraced believer’s baptism alone. Regarding the Lord’s Supper, the Reformers again rejected the Catholic sacramental view, and replaced it with varied views of the supper. Luther, who believed that Christ was physically present in, with, and under the elements, considered the Supper to be sustenance for enduring belief. Calvin, who believed that Christ was spiritually present in the elements, thought of the Supper as spiritual nourishment of God’s covenant grace for weary souls. Zwingli, who believed that Christ was absent from the elements, taught that the Supper was an expression of one’s commitment to Christ. Although the Reformers did not agree with how to view sacramental theology, they all agreed that the Catholic view should be rejected.
