---
layout: post
title: Evangelism Conference Introduction
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Alvin Reid's 9Marks Evangelism Conference class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

The upcoming 9Marks conference at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary will discuss evangelism. Because each 9Marks conference is "about the church, for the church," this conference will focus on the church and the Christian's role in evangelism, as well as methods pertaining therein. Indeed, the stated goal of the conference is to answer the following questions:

> What is evangelism?
What is the church's role in evangelism?
Who is called to evangelize?
How can I evangelize better to my neighbor?

While answering the above questions, the conference will also focus on the nature and significance of the gospel, gospel centrality, conversion, and evangelism, each of which will be discussed in turn below. The gospel is the good news of Jesus Christ. Although God created the heavens and the earth in perfection and goodness, the first generation chose to disobey their creator, thus bringing sin to humanity and fallenness to the world (Gen. 1:31; Gen. 3:6--7; Rom. 8:22). The ultimate consequence of sin is everlasting separation from God's goodness in hell, a place of perpetual darkness and everlasting fire (Matt. 8:12; Rev. 20:14). Through his covenant people, God gave the law in order to reveal himself and his attributes. However, the law also demonstrated that humans are sinful and incapable of living up to God's standard, namely, perfection (Rom. 3:20). Therefore, in the fullness of time, God sent his Son, Jesus, to live a perfect life and to die for those under the law (Gal. 4:4--5). Jesus, the Christ, lived the perfect life humans can not live and died to pay a debt humans can not pay in order to give humanity the opportunity to look to him as Lord and mediator before God the Father (1 Tim. 2:5). By believing and following Jesus, humans can be made right with God, becoming his children and receiving his inheritance, i.e., life everlasting with him in a new heaven and a new earth (Heb. 9:15).

Because of this good news, the importance of gospel centrality is apparent. The church must focus on proclaiming the good news of Jesus Christ both to those who do not yet believe and to those who already believe. The message of Christ can renew and restore both the sinner who has not yet been forgiven and the saint who has.. The purpose of the church is to worship God and to usher in others to worship him likewise, in spirit and truth (John 4:23--24; Matt. 28:20). Without the centrality of Christ and his message, the church will ultimately fail its mission.

What is the gospel without conversion? For conversion is one's turning from darkness to light, from self to God, from sin to holiness, and from a heart of stone to a heart of flesh. Conversion begins with faith, which is a gracious gift from God (Eph. 2:8). This faith is in the Person of the gospel, Jesus Christ. In the moment of true faith, the new Christian is justified before God because of the sacrifice of Christ (Gal. 2:16). Flowing out of faith comes repentance, a process of turning away from sin and turning toward God, which leads to progressive sanctification in holiness (1 Thess. 4:3; 2 Cor. 7:1). The Christian is converted in order to honor God through a temporal life of progressive holiness and an everlasting life of perfect holiness (Heb. 10:10, 14).

How will anyone be converted to the Christ of the gospel if they are not told the good news? The proclamation of the good news, the *euangelion*, is properly called evangelism. The Christian evangelizes for the sake of both God and the hearer. However, not every recipient of evangelism will acknowledge the news as good. For those who do not believe, the gospel will be received as folly, but for those who do believe, the gospel is the power of God (1 Cor. 1:18)! Although faith is a gift from God, God gives no assurance that any will be saved outside of the evangelistic work of the church (Rom. 10:14). For this reason, the church and Christians must diligently evangelize by proclaiming the good news of Christ to those who do not know him. Every church must obey Christ's commission to make disciples through evangelism in its own town, region, and even to the ends of the earth (Matt. 28:18--20; Acts 1:8).

It seems oftentimes that the importance of evangelism is lost on the church and Christians. However, proclaiming the good news, receiving converts, making disciples, and training them to follow Jesus ought to be the outworking of one's own faith in Christ. One who is not yet convinced of the necessity and importance of evangelism ought to consider this question, “How else is one to come to a saving faith in the Lord Jesus, if not through evangelism?”
