---
layout: post
title: Christ is First
category: posts
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Biblical Hermeneutics class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

The theme of Paul's letter to Colossae is that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is Lord over all and he shares his power with his followers. In Colossians 1:13-23, Paul begins the theme of his epistle by arguing that Christ is firstborn, creator, sustainer, and reconciler, and thus preeminent over all creation in every way. The meaning of this text is that Christ is Lord over all and can reconcile all creation to himself by his blood; each man may be reconciled if he continues in the faith and hope of the gospel.

Paul begins this pericope stating that the Father has transferred the saints from the kingdom of darkness to the kingdom of the Son, in whom is redemption (Colossians 1:13-14). This thesis statement echoes other epistles which communicate this kingdom transfer in the language of adoption (Ephesians 1:5-7) and election (2 Peter 1:10-11). From this statement of transference, Paul explains the preeminence of Christ by showing that he is first in every way. Paul claims that Christ is preeminent because he is the "firstborn of all creation" (Colossians 1:15); this allusion to Psalm 89:27 implies that Christ is also the King of kings and Lord of lords (cf. Revelation 19:16, 1 Timothy 1:17). In Romans 8:29, Paul states that the Son is the image of God and stands as firstborn among brothers who are "conformed to the image of [the] Son." While Christ is titularly the firstborn of all creation, he himself was not created "for by him all things were created... through him and for him" (Colossians 1:16). This is not a new argument for Paul as it is repeated elsewhere with a consistent emphasis that all things exist *from and for* the Father and *by and through* the Son (cf. Romans 11:36, 1 Corinthians 8:6, Ephesians 1:21). In Colossians 1:17-18a, Paul quickly lists more preeminent attributes: Christ is before all things (cf. John 1:1, John 8:58), holds all things together (cf. Hebrews 1:3), is the head of the church (cf. Ephesians 1:22), and is the beginning (cf. Revelation 3:14). Paul argues that Christ is not only firstborn of creation, but also firstborn from the dead, the first to an eternal resurrection (cf. Acts 26:23, 1 Corinthians 15:20, Revelation 1:5). Indeed, Luke expounds that Christ must suffer and be firstborn from the dead so that he could "proclaim light both to our people and to the Gentiles" (Acts 26:23). 

Paul concludes that the fullness of God dwells in Christ who is preeminent over all so that through him all things may be reconciled to him through the peace bought by his blood (Colossians 1:19-20, cf. Ephesians 2:13-14, 2 Corinthians 5:18). He applies this reality to his audience, reminding them that they were once evil, but are now reconciled to Christ "in his body of flesh by his death" (Colossians 1:21-22). Paul repeats the reality of Christ's reconciliation of evildoers in many of his epistles (cf. Ephesians 2:1, Romans 7:4, 1 Corinthians 1:8). Following this glorious truth, Paul warns the Colossians to continue in the faith and hope of the gospel; the implication is that those who do not persevere will not be reconciled (Colossians 1:23). Jesus expressed the same truth of remaining in the faith by abiding in him using the metaphor of the vine (John 15:1-17).

Throughout this pericope, Paul clearly argues for the preeminence of Christ who can reconcile all creation to himself. Christ holds the power of reconciliation because he made peace by his blood and is firstborn from the dead. The significance of this text is that we should continue in the faith and hope of the gospel because our preeminent Christ is able to reconcile us to himself.
