---
layout: post
title: Christ is Better
category: posts
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Biblical Hermeneutics class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

Throughout the book of Hebrews, the author argues for the supremacy of Christ over every aspect of the old covenant. The first six chapters argue that Christ is superior to the angels, mankind, and even Moses because he is the Son of God and the great high priest. The meaning of Hebrews 7 is that Christ is superior to Abraham and the Levitical priests because he is "a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek", "the guarantor of a better covenant", and "able to save to the uttermost" (Hebrews 7:17, 22, 25).

The author of Hebrews interprets Genesis 14:18-20 to show Melchizedek as the typological priestly king which Jesus would later fulfill. In the Genesis account, the priest-king Melchizedek provided bread and wine and then blessed Abraham. Soon after Melchizedek's blessing, the LORD covenanted with Abraham and promised him a son as heir (Genesis 15). In the same manner, the priestly Son of God distributed bread and wine as a blessing and ushered in the new covenant with his own death on the cross (cf. 1 Corinthians 11:23-25).

Melchizedek is the king of peace and righteousness and a priest of the Most High God (Hebrews 7:1-2). He is without recorded beginning or end, and therefore appears to be a perpetual priest (Hebrews 7:3). He is shown to be superior both to Abraham and the Levitical priests because of the nature of Abraham's tithe to Melchizedek and Melchizedek's blessing upon Abraham (Hebrews 7:4; cf. Numbers 18:21, 26; 2 Chronicles 31:4-5). Because Jesus fulfills the type foreshadowed by Melchizedek, he is greater than Abraham and the Levitical priests as well. 

The author argues that the establishment of the new eternal, Melchizedekian priesthood in Christ demonstrates that the Levitical priesthood was imperfect (Hebrews 7:11). Furthermore, Christ is a priest not by bodily descent, but by bodily resurrection, fulfilling the typology of Melchizedek as the true eternal priest (Hebrews 7:16-17, Psalm 110:4). This change in priesthood necessitated a change in the law, from a weak and useless law to a perfect, eternal covenant—a better hope, so that we may draw near to God (Hebrews 7:12, 18-19, 22). Paul similarly argues that if the law and the Levitical priesthood were capable of perfecting mankind, "then Christ died for no purpose" (Galatians 2:21). Indeed, the new covenant guaranteed by Christ is perfect and the old covenant law is imperfect "for God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do" and "by [Christ] everyone who believes is freed from everything from which you could not be freed by the law of Moses" (Hebrews 7:22, Romans 8:3, Acts 13:39). 

Finally, the author of Hebrews argues that the imperfection of the Levitical priesthood is rooted in the sin and mortality of the priests themselves and  their need to make daily sacrifices (Hebrews 7:23-24, 27-28). Christ is the better high priest because he is eternal, innocent, and exalted, having offered himself as the perfect sacrifice (Hebrews 7:24-27). Our perfect high priest became the perfect sacrifice so that both his priesthood and his sacrifice remain valid forevermore.

As king, priest, and sacrifice, Jesus initiated a new covenant through his perfect life, innocent slaughter, bodily resurrection, and heavenly reign. The old covenant was imperfect because it was incapable of making men perfect; therefore, Christ, as the guarantor of a perfect covenant, is better than the priests who maintained the imperfect covenant. The significance of this text is that we should depart from the old, imperfect covenant and embrace the new, perfect covenant by following Jesus Christ, the Son of God, our perfect sacrifice, eternal high priest, and reigning king.
