---
layout: post
title: Yet without Sin
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Biblical Hermeneutics class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

<cite class='bibleref' title='Matthew 4'>Matthew 4</cite> is an account of Jesus' trial in the wilderness. After forty days of fasting, Jesus is tempted by the devil to rule an earthly kingdom by making much of himself as the Son of God, rather than ruling a heavenly kingdom through his own lowly sacrifice. However, Jesus resists the devil while quoting from Deuteronomy. The meaning of the text is that Jesus is the sinless Son of God who is able to resist temptation by the power of the Spirit and the Word of God while fulfilling the will of the Father.
For forty days, Jesus fasted in the wilderness; this corresponds to Israel's forty years of wandering after the exodus. Jesus' trial during this time was described succinctly in Mark 1:12-13 and fully in Luke 4:1-13. In each account, Jesus' wilderness testing is preceded immediately by his baptism, including the Father's proclamation that Jesus is the Son of God, and is followed by the initiation of Jesus' ministry. While Luke describes the temptations in the same manner as Matthew, they are presented in a different order. Because of the language concerning Satan's departure in both texts, Matthew's account seems to be the chronological reading (<cite class='bibleref' title='Matthew 4:10-11'>vv. 10-11</cite>, cf. Luke 4:13).

In the first temptation, the devil suggests that Jesus prove his deity by turning the stones into bread (<cite class='bibleref' title='Matthew 4:3-4'>vv. 3-4</cite>). However, Jesus responds by quoting Deuteronomy 8:3, which states that God humbled Israel and allowed them to hunger so that he might feed them with manna and show them that man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God. Similarly, John records Jesus having said, "My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to accomplish his work" (John 4:34). Following the will of the Father was more important to Jesus than satiating his hunger.

The devil then takes Jesus to the top of the temple in Jerusalem, prompting Jesus to throw himself down to prove that he is the Son of God (<cite class='bibleref' title='Matthew 4:5-7'>vv. 5-7</cite>). To tempt Jesus, the devil partially quotes Psalm 91:11-12 to claim that angels will protect him from harm. This is a misuse of the Psalm passage which applies to those who dwell with the LORD and are following in his ways (Psalm 91:9-11). Jesus responds by quoting Deuteronomy 6:16, which teaches not to test the LORD as Israel did at Massah. Significantly, Massah is where Moses struck a rock to release water; this was a physical manifestation of the truth that they were drinking spiritual water from the Rock which was Christ (Exodus 17:6, cf. 1 Corinthians 10:1-5). Therefore, Jesus is subtly reaffirming that he was at Massah and that he is indeed the Son of God.
As the final temptation, the devil takes Jesus on a mountain and promises him all the kingdoms of the world if Jesus would worship him (<cite class='bibleref' title='Matthew 4:8-10'>vv. 8-10</cite>). Jesus ends the temptations by commanding Satan to be gone and quoting Deuteronomy 6:13, that you should only worship the LORD and no other gods.

Throughout his trial in the wilderness, the Son of God resisted temptation by relying on the power of the Spirit, the Word of God, and the will of his Father. Jesus was tempted as we are tempted, yet without sin, and is therefore a high priest who is able to help us as we are tempted and sympathize with our weaknesses (Hebrews 2:18, 4:15). The significance of the text is that when we are tempted to sin, we should rely upon the Spirit and the Son as our help for resisting temptation and remember Jesus as our example for following the will of the Father.
