---
layout: post
title: For the City
category: reviews
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Mike Dodson's SEND North America Conference class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

*For the City: Proclaiming and Living Out the Gospel*. By Darrin Patrick and Matt Carter. Zondervan, 2010, 193 pp.,  $6.64 Kindle.

Darrin Patrick, pastor of The Journey in St. Louis, and Matt Carter, pastor of The Austin Stone, each have visions for their cities. *For the City* is oriented around the experiences and lessons learned by these men in their respective city-oriented churches. Carter begins by reflecting upon his use of Charles Spurgeon’s Metropolitan Tabernacle as his church planting model. Spurgeon’s church met the needs of the people of London by proclaiming the gospel while also caring for the poor, elderly, and orphans to the point that the city “would have grieved the loss of the Tabernacle” (p. 22). Patrick’s biographical sketch details the beginnings of many of his church’s campuses. The remaining chapters are biographical in nature, but they are constructed to provide a model for other churches to reach their respective cities.

Patrick calls churches to contextualize the gospel by communicating “with a culture’s terms but not on the culture’s terms” (p. 69) while “enter[ing] into culture without losing its Christian distinctiveness” (p. 81). He also exhorts churches to “leverage the opportunities the city provides for authentic, gospel-centered community” (p. 93). Finally, Patrick writes that churches for the city must serve the city; he offers multiple models of service from his own church. Carter pens the remaining chapters and emphasizes the need for leaders to equip churches to minister for the city. This includes communicating that the church is a group of people who must go out in order to reach the lost. His church further equips members through missional communities that are encouraged to plant their own churches should the occasion arise (p. 123). Carter provides a necessary corrective to modern suburban churches, calling the church to teach and model suffering well, for “as we suffer with and for our city, we suffer like Christ — sacrificially, pointing others to the goodness of God, for his glory” (p. 142).

Patrick and Carter reunite with confessions of their self-acknowledged mistakes including over-promising results, maintaining unqualified leaders, escaping difficult problems, and bloating the church with programs. The authors conclude with an odd illustration of Jonah as an exemplar of being for the city. While Patrick and Carter consider Jonah to be a model “in a backward sort of way” (p. 173), he does exemplify our most sinful attitudes toward lost cities—attitudes that need to change.

Because this book is biographical in nature, there are some unfortunate, unquestioned assumptions within the text. Patrick and Carter both pastor multi-campus mega-churches and this church structure is painted as requisite for effectively reaching a city. Rather than espousing a model that partners with sister churches directly, the authors encourage partnerships with non-profit organizations (NPOs). Carter even promoted a dangerous “strategic decision”: explicitly partnering with non-faith-based NPOs which do not share the “church’s mission of redemption in Christ for the joy of all peoples” (p. 128). Patrick’s language can also be so focused on serving the city that the gospel vision of saving the city appears to be lost. At times, being for the city seems to forsake reaching the city with the good news of Jesus Christ.

*For the City* offers helpful insight into how two churches are currently being effective in serving their cities. Church leaders would be wise to glean the best that this book has to offer, while being cautious of some of its failings. Perhaps most significantly, Patrick and Carter’s work will help many pastors catch God’s vision for their cities and spur contemplation in how their churches might participate in God’s work.
