--- 
layout: post 
title: "The Chiastic Key to 1 Corinthians 11:2–16" 
category: papers 
tag: seminary 
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Biblical Hermeneutics class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

Christians must concern themselves with obeying the Lord’s commandments. Do Christians disobey Scripture when they do not explicitly observe Paul’s exhortation to the Corinthians to observe the tradition of head-coverings? At first glance, the arguments Paul makes regarding headship, glory, angels, and nature makes it difficult to know if the head-covering tradition ought to be universally observed. Indeed, “this passage is full of notorious exegetical difficulties.”[^1] Despite the difficulties, this paper will demonstrate that Paul’s chiastic-structured argument uses universal truths and cultural mores to exhort the Corinthians to maintain the tradition of head-coverings within the church in order to honor headship, promote propriety, and reveal glory. His concern in this pericope is consistent with his broader concerns for the Corinthians: the church ought to be unified, loving, and mutually submissive to the glory of God.

# Context

Paul’s first canonical epistle to the Corinthians is a concerned response to reports and letters he had received regarding his beloved church.[^2] Throughout his letter, Paul exhorts the Corinthian Christians to be unified in Christ to the glory of God, demonstrated by forgoing certain liberties for the sake of the brethren.[^3] Paul even uses himself as a model for giving up one’s rights for the sake of the Church and the proclamation of the Gospel.[^4] Immediately prior to the pericope in question, Paul exhorts his audience to do all things to the glory of God, giving offense neither to believers nor non-believers, pleasing everyone, just as he attempts to do. Boldly, he then encourages his fellow Christians to imitate him as he imitates Christ (1 Cor. 10:23--11:1)! Paul then transitions into the passage in view, in which he expresses his concern for the Corinthian observation of the tradition of head-coverings in worship. Following this passage, Paul includes instructions regarding a loving Lord’s Supper, use of the spiritual gifts, an exhortation to love, and instructions for orderly worship (1 Cor. 11:17--14:40). In 1 Corinthians 11:2--16, Paul transitions from exhorting the Corinthians in their behavior in the world, to exhorting them in their behavior within the church body. As acknowledged by Thiselton, “A genuine breakthrough is offered by … the theme of self-discipline, restraint, and respect for ‘the other,’ already prominent in 8:1--11:1, remains central to 11:2--14:40.”[^5] The hermeneutical context for this passage must be Paul’s command to imitate him, as he imitates Christ, doing all things to the glory of God, while seeking no advantage and no offense.[^6]

# Chiastic Interpretation

The hermeneutical approach of this paper will extend Gordon Fee’s chiastic structure for verses 8--12 and apply it to all of verses 2--16.[^7] This will demonstrate that Paul’s intention is for the Corinthians to maintain the received tradition of head-coverings within the church, for the sake of their culture’s sense of honor and propriety, based in God’s created-order of image and glory. Each chiastic level will be analyzed until the locus of the structure is reached in verse 10.[^8]

## Maintaining Tradition (vv. 2; 16) 

Paul frames his instruction regarding head-coverings with verses 2 and 16, both of which call for the Corinthians to maintain the received tradition.[^9] To introduce the topic and encourage the Corinthians, Paul praises the church for maintaining the traditions as he delivered them (v. 2). This is a strong contrast to his tone in verse 17, showing that Paul is truly commending[^10] the Corinthians in verse 2 and providing a calm corrective or clarification regarding the tradition of head-coverings in verses 3--16.[^11] In his conclusion to this pericope (v. 16), Paul claims that neither his churches, nor the others, absolve themselves of the tradition of head-coverings.[^12] Clearly, Paul is affirming the practice of head-coverings as a widely-received tradition. However, as a received tradition, the practice of head-coverings is extra-biblical.[^13] In what follows, Paul argues that the Corinthians should maintain this tradition for the sake of others to the glory of God.

## Honor, Propriety, and Headship (vv. 3--6; 13--15) 

Paul’s argument for maintaining the head-covering tradition flows first from honor and propriety, rooted in headship. He declares, “Christ is the head of every man, and the man is the head of a woman,[^14] and God is the head of Christ” (1 Cor. 11:3 [NASB]). Throughout this pericope, Paul uses “head” as wordplay, serving as a polymorphous concept.[^15] It is of no surprise that there is a modern debate regarding the interpretation of “head.” However, consider first Paul’s usage of “head” in his epistles. In Ephesians 5:23--24, Paul teaches that the husband is head of the wife as Christ is head of the Church and both wives and the Church ought to submit to their respective heads. This comes from the larger context of Ephesians 5:21--28, which emphasizes believers’ mutual submission out of reverence for Christ, and Christ’s exemplary love for his bride as a model for husbands. In Ephesians 5, Paul is using “head” as a sacrificially-loving authority. In the same epistle, Paul describes Christ as “head over everything for the church, which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in every way” (Ephesians 1:22--23 [NIV]). Christ is depicted as having authority over the church, which is his own body, an authority for fullness, not dominion. 

Finally, in his epistle to the Colossians, Paul uses Christ’s headship over the church as a component of his argument for Christ’s preeminence over all things (Col. 1:18). Fee disagrees with this interpretation, writing, “Paul refers to Christ as the ‘head’ of his body, the church, in a context that implies he is the source of its being.”[^16] However, Paul clearly states the point of his argument: “that in everything [Christ] might be preeminent” (Col. 1:18 [ESV]). Thiselton holds that the proper interpretation of “head” in 1 Corinthians 11 is both “preeminent” (in reference to God and Christ), and “foremost” (in reference to man).[^17] While both “preeminent” and “loving authority” follow the interpretation of “head” used in other Pauline passages, “source” does not seem to be supported by the New Testament evidence.[^18] Whichever interpretation of “head” is chosen, it must legitimately apply to each of the relationships in view (between man and Christ, woman and man, and Christ and God.)[^19] Regardless of one’s interpretation of the “head” wordplay, Paul is not making a theological argument for headship; he is stating an assumed theological truth about headship in order to appeal to the consciences of the Corinthian church concerning their head-coverings.[^20]

Now that Paul has identified the theological underpinning for his argument, he uses the polymorphous “head” as a pun to teach that, while praying and prophesying,[^21] every man with a covered head dishonors his head and every woman[^22] with an uncovered head dishonors her head (vv. 4--5). Regardless of the specific practices of the now unknown tradition of head-coverings,[^23] Paul’s point is that a Corinthian’s covering or uncovering one’s physical head brings dishonor to one’s metaphorical head.[^24] The manner of dishonor can only be speculated because the dishonor is rooted in an unknown cultural context. Although Fee argues that Paul is using the example of man with a covered head merely as a hypothetical contrast to the woman’s uncovered head,[^25] Paul seems to be addressing the actual (or at least potential) behavior of both men and women.[^26] In an effort to bring further reminder that improper head-coverings are culturally offensive, Paul uses the analogy of an uncovered woman to one who has had her hair cut off (vv. 5--6). He concludes that this too is disgraceful; therefore, the woman should be covered (v. 6b). 

Paul continues this argument in the chiastic parallel of verses 13--15. He rhetorically asks his readers to judge for themselves if it is proper for a woman to pray with her head uncovered (v. 13). Paul continues his rhetoric, asserting that nature itself teaches long hair is a disgrace for a man and long hair a glory for a woman (vv. 14--15). However, one must observe that Paul’s rhetoric concerning traditional head-coverings is based on a sense of propriety and nature, a sense which many societies do not share with the people of Corinth. If some were to answer Paul’s rhetorical questions, their answers would be justifiably different.[^27] Paul’s use of “nature” in verse 14 is more akin to his use of “proper” in verse 13; “nature” is not a reference to created-order but to cultural mores.[^28] Just as the chiastic parallel in verses 4--6 was argued in terms of honor and disgrace, Paul’s argument here is in terms of glory and dishonor.[^29] The exhortation to observe specific expressions of honor and propriety are limited to cultures which understand the expressions in such terms. The core of Paul’s argument is that the Corinthian Christians ought to participate in the head-covering tradition because not observing it would result in dishonor and disgrace for them and their respective heads. 

## Image, Glory, and Interdependence (vv. 7--9; 11--12) 

The final chiastic pair in view is verses 7--9 and verses 11--12. Paul begins his argument, “For a man ought not to have his head covered, since he is the image and glory of God; but the woman is the glory of man” (v. 7 [NASB]).[^30] Paul’s focus here is on glory because both man and woman were created in the image of God.[^31] Paul’s use of glory echoes the Psalmist, “You have made him a little lower than the heavenly beings and crowned him with glory and honor” (Ps. 8:5 [ESV]). While this Psalm is interpreted in the New Testament to describe Christ Jesus,[^32] the imagery is still useful to Paul’s point: the crown of a man is the glory of God.[^33] Using language similar to the Psalmist, the author of Proverbs exults, “An excellent wife is the crown of her husband” (Prov. 12:4 [ESV]). Paul explains his own assertion that woman is the glory of man by citing creation-order; woman was made from man and for man.[^34] “Woman from man” clearly refers to Genesis 2:21--23 in which Eve was created by God from the rib of Adam. Similarly, “woman for man” is in reference to a few verses prior, in which God declares, “It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him a helper fit for him” (Gen. 2:18 [ESV]).[^35] Paul similarly appeals to creation-order in 1 Timothy 2:11--13, arguing that a woman should not exercise authority over a man. Therefore, Paul argues from Genesis 2:18--23 both that a woman’s authority is a man (1 Tim. 2:11--13) and woman is the glory of man (1 Cor. 11:7--9). If one interprets “head” (from vv. 3--5) as “authority,” then it is clear that Paul’s use of “head¸” “authority,” and “glory” are interconnected; a submissive body glorifies its head. A woman brings glory to her man when she submits to him just as a man brings glory to Christ through his own submission.

Finishing this chiasm, Paul declares in verses 11--12 that man and woman are interdependent in the Lord.[^36] Just as Eve was made from Adam, every man is born through a woman, from God. Paul now appeals to mankind’s ongoing creation relationship to argue for spiritual interdependence, which seems to be similar to his declaration to the Galatians, “There is no male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus” (3:28 [ESV]). For Paul, there appears to be a tension between the physically-based relationship of a woman submitting to a man and the spiritually-based relationship of mutual submission in Christ.[^37] The Christian church exists squarely within both of these relational domains. Paul argues for a woman in Corinth to follow the head-covering tradition in a spirit of mutual submission because it brings glory to her man.[^38]

## Paul’s Conclusion (v. 10) 

While Paul expresses his conclusion regarding men’s head-coverings in verse 7, he waits until verse 10 to give his conclusion for women. However, this verse does not present itself without difficulty.[^39] Paul’s conclusion is supported both by his prior argument (vv. 3--9) and because of the angels.[^40] Tertullian believed Paul’s concern was the angels’ response to women’s immodesty, similar to those who revolted from God for the beauty of the daughters of men.[^41] Although immodesty does not seem to be Paul’s concern for the angels,[^42] he teaches elsewhere that the heavenly angels are present for church gatherings.[^43] With this in mind, perhaps Paul is making an appeal to spare the angels from witnessing Christians refusing to acknowledge their head. Unfortunately, any particular argument for Paul’s intention in appealing for the angels requires speculation.[^44] Regardless, Paul’s reference to angels adds supernatural force to his conclusion.

The next difficulty lies with the phrase ὀφείλει ἡ γυνὴ ἐξουσίαν ἔχειν ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς (1 Cor. 10 [UBS<sup>4</sup>]), which is translated in the NASB and NIV as “the woman ought to have a symbol of authority on her head,” and “a woman ought to have authority over her own head,” respectively.[^45] Both translations attempt to interpret the original language into something more discernible than a direct translation would allow.[^46] The NASB takes ἐξουσίαν (authority) as a metonym for a symbolic head-covering (hence, “symbol of authority”),[^47] while the NIV forces reflexivity with “her own head.” The interpretation used by the NIV[^48] disagrees with the force of Paul’s argumentation in verses 3--9 and leaves the women with a distinctly different type of exhortation than the men. Under this interpretation, a man ought to remain uncovered while a woman ought to have authority over her own head. This has two difficulties: 1) the woman is given more freedom than the man, and 2) the implication is that a woman does not actually have the authority in view, but that she ought to have it (which is antithetical to the very point of this interpretation). Because of the hermeneutical difficulties of the NIV translation, one can surmise that the traditional view is correct (ἐξουσίαν as a metonym), and agree with the NASB translation. Paul rests his argument in verse 10 with his conclusion that the Corinthian women should maintain their received head-covering tradition.

# Meaning

Through an analysis of the chiastic structure of 1 Corinthians 11:2--16, the meaning of this passage is clear: Paul desires the Corinthian church to maintain the received tradition of appropriate head-coverings. Paul’s argument shows that appropriate head-covering practice culturally communicated both the headship of Christ over men and the headship a man over a woman. Furthermore, observance of the tradition brought honor to each metaphorical head, while non-observance brought shame and disgrace; a woman’s long hair was to her glory and covering her hair was to her man’s glory. For the sake of everyone’s consciences, Paul’s desire is for the Corinthian women to wear their traditional head-coverings and for the men to abstain from such practice.

# Significance

As can be discerned from this passage’s chiastic structure and its placement within the epistle, Paul’s expectation for the Corinthians to continue the head-covering tradition is based in his desire for them to promote unity in Christ by forgoing their rights for the sake of others. In the Corinthian context, breaking from the head-covering tradition brought shame and disgrace to oneself and to others. Not observing the traditional practice also communicated a denial of proper headship. Paul taught Christ is the head of man, man is the head of woman, and God is the head of Christ. Christians should strive to communicate this truth, and abstain from communicating any denial of it. Paul also affirmed that mankind is the image of God, man (male) is the glory of God, and woman is the glory of man. Men and women should each reveal the glory of their metaphorical heads in appropriate ways. Finally, Christians must continually seek the good of others, even giving up freedoms in order to do so. Perhaps Dachollom Datiri frames this passage best, writing, “The basic question is, what glorifies God within one’s local setting?”[^49] Indeed, the significance of this text is that Christians ought to affirm cultural expressions of eternal truths for the good of others to the glory of God.[^50]

[^1]: Gordon Fee, *The First Epistle to the Corinthians*, New International Commentary on the New Testament (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1987), 492. [^2]: 1 Cor. 1:11, Chloe’s report; 7:1, written matters. [^3]: 1 Cor. 1:10, unity; 1:11--17, against apostolic sectarianism; 4:18, arrogance; 6:7, suffering wrong; 6:15, members of Christ, not prostitutes; 8:9, ensure rights are not a stumbling block; 9:12, Paul gave up his own rights; 10:24, seek the good of the neighbor; 10:32, give no offense; 11:33 wait for each other in the Lord’s supper; 12:4, the same spirit gives gifts; 13:13, love is required; 14:12, use gifts to build up the church; 16:1, collect money for the saints. [^4]: 1 Cor. 9 is Paul’s clearest demonstration of giving up his rights. [^5]: Anthony C. Thiselton, *The First Epistle to the Corinthians*, New International Greek Testament Commentary (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2000), 803. [^6]: 1 Cor. 10:31--11:1 is not merely a summary of what came before, but also point forward to 1 Cor. 11--14. [^7]: Gordon Fee provides an outline of the passage and articulates a chiasm in vv. 8--12 (Fee, 493--494).  [^8]: V. 10 is also the locus of Fee’s chiastic structure (Fee, 494). [^9]: E. Earle Ellis, “Traditions in 1 Corinthians,” *New Testament Studies* 32, no. 4 (October 1986): 493. [^10]: According to Thiselton that this is true praise, not irony, as is often interpreted (810). Contra Richard Oster, “When Men Wore Veils to Worship: the Historical Context of 1 Corinthians 11.4,” *New Testament Studies*, 34, no.4 (October 1988): 503. [^11]: Indeed, “The very nature of [Paul’s] argumentation reveals that it is not something over which he has great passion” (Fee, 530). [^12]: Some commentators agree that “no such practice” refers to head-coverings, e.g., Fee (525), while others contend that “no such practice” refers to being contentious, e.g., Calvin (John Calvin, *Commentary on the Epistles of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians Vol. 1*, trans. John Pringle, Calvin’s Commentaries (Grand Rapids: Baker Book, 1973), 363). [^13]: Calvin, 352. Also, Paul’s lack of explanation of the received tradition is anecdotal evidence that the tradition is not expected for universal practice. “We simply do not know what the practice was that they were abusing. Thus literal ‘obedience’ to the text is often merely symbolic” (Fee, 512). [^14]: The NASB uses “man” and “woman” while the ESV uses “husband” and “wife.” While the view of man and woman here includes husband and wife, it is limited to a husband and wife. Could not the relationship of a daughter to her father be included as well? However, because Paul states that every man’s head is Christ, but a woman’s head is a/the man, he seems to be arguing that each woman has one man as her head, not that every woman has any man as her head. [^15]: Thiselton, 820; Cf. Fee, 499. [^16]: Fee, 504. [^17]: Thiselton, 812. [^18]: Grudem argues that “source” is never a valid interpretation for “head” in Greek literature (Wayne Grudem, “Does κεφαλὴ (‘Head’) Mean ‘Source’ or ‘Authority Over’ in Greek Literature? A Survey of 2,336 Examples,” *Trinity Journal*, ns 6.1 (Spring 1985): 58). However, Fee soundly disagrees with Grudem’s research and contends that interpreting “head” as “authority” is “rare in Greek literature” (Fee, 502). Unfortunately, the polemical arguments from both scholars show their bias in attempting to make this passage into a proof-text for their respective positions concerning the roles of men and women. Thiselton rightly wrote, “The simplistic solution of collapsing 11:2--16 into either bare egalitarianism or into an overstated ‘subordinationism’ does justice neither to Paul’s view of gender nor to his theology of God and Christ” (Thiselton, 803). [^19]: E.g., MacArthur’s language of authority and subordination seems too strong to apply to each relationship appropriately (John MacArthur, *1 Corinthians*, MacArthur New Testament Commentary (Chicago: Moody, 1984), 253). Kistemaker does well in his attempt to separate authority from superiority and inferiority (Simon J. Kistemaker, *1 Corinthians*, New Testament Commentary (Grand Rapids: Baker Books, 1993), 366). Thiselton’s interpretation of “preeminence” and “foremost” seems to take a moderate stance between the extreme interpretations presented by some from both the complementarian and egalitarian camps (804). [^20]: Ambrose used this verse in his argument against Arianism (*Exposition of the Christian Faith*, NPNF 10:265). [^21]: The nature of female praying and prophesying is not the point of this pericope. The practice itself does not seem to be condemned and can therefore serve as anecdotal evidence that Paul does not command actual silence from women in the church, but rather that they should be honorable, inoffensive, non-authoritative, and submissive to their husbands. Cf. 1 Corinthians 14:34, 1 Timothy 2:12. Consider also the mention of the prophetess Anna in Luke 2:36 and the prophetic daughters in Acts 21:9. Contra “He at the same time does not give them permission to prophesy in some other way, but rather delays his condemnation of that vice to another passage, namely in chapter xiv” (Calvin, 356). [^22]: Tertullian promotes universal practice by arguing that “every woman” includes “of every age, of every rank, of every condition” (*On Prayer*, ANF 3:688). Granted, he is in a cultural context in which the virgins, who would normally be covered in public, were removing their head-coverings at church. Indeed, the cultural custom of head-coverings for Tertullian’s church seems not so different from that of the Corinthian church, which is one explanation for Tertullian’s conclusion that the head-covering tradition should be universal; his reading of Paul’s arguments agree with his cultural views to the point that he applies it to all cultures, everywhere. [^23]: Re: male head-covering, “Almost certainly, therefore, by this idiom Paul is referring to an external cloth covering (Fee, 506). Fee also outlines three options for a female head-covering: 1) some kind of external covering, 2) long hair, or 3) loosed hair (Fee, 496). [^24]: Martin makes a medical argument that hair was considered part of the female genitalia at the time, and thus culturally subject to covering (Troy W. Martin, “Paul’s Argument from Nature for the Veil in 1 Corinthians 11:13--15: A Testicle Instead of a Head Covering,” *Journal of Biblical Literature* 123, no. 1 (2004): 82). [^25]: Fee, 508. [^26]: Oster makes an historical argument that some Corinthian men would have been covering their heads in worship (504). [^27]: This is a key to today’s abstention from the tradition of head-coverings. Paul’s overt concern was the effect of discarding the tradition, not the tradition itself. [^28]: “It is hardly possible for Paul, as a Hellenistic Jew, not to have known the far-reaching significance that ‘nature’ had in Greek thinking, especially in contemporary popular philosophy, Stoicism in particular” (Fee, 526--527). Also, “Paul appeals to their judgment about what behavior was considered natural, within the limits of the place and period in which he was writing” (Dachollom Datiri, “1 Corinthians,” in *Africa Bible Commentary*, ed. Tokunboh Adeyemo (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2006), 1391). [^29]: “For her hair is given to her for a covering” (1 Cor. 11:15b [NASB]), should not be interpreted as antithetical to Paul’s prior argument; the force of the chiasm is too strong. Paul’s intention here must be to support his argument that a woman ought to cover her hair. Cf. Fee, 528. Cf. There is one creative interpretation promoted by Martin which argues for “covering” to be interpreted as “testicle” (84). However, this was refuted strongly by Mark Goodacre (“Does περιβόλαιον Mean ‘Testicle’ in 1 Corinthians 11:15?” *Journal of Biblical Literature,*130, no. 2 (2011): 391--396). Nonetheless, Martin’s historical account of hair as genitalia is intriguing. [^30]: John Cassian used this verse to argue for the immaterial soul (*First Conference of Abbot Moses*, NPNF 11:302). This verse was also important in the debate with the Eusebians (Athanasius, *Defence of the Nicene Definition*, NPNF 4:163; Theodoret, *The Ecclesiastical History*, NPNF 3:45). [^31]: Genesis 1:26--27 clearly demonstrates that mankind (הָֽאָדָם֙) was created in the image of God as both male (זָכָ֥ר) and female (נְקֵבָ֖ה). [^32]: Heb. 2:6--8, 1 Cor. 15:27. [^33]: Cf. Kistemaker, 374. [^34]: 1 Cor. 11:8--9. Cf. Fee makes an interesting point regarding the creation narrative, “When the man in the OT narrative sees the woman, he ‘glories’ in her by bursting into song” (Fee, 517). [^35]: “The two sentences together are reflections of Gen. 2:23 and 18--20.” (Fee, 517). [^36]: Kistemaker, 378; Datiri, 1390. [^37]: Cf. Ephesians 5:21; Calvin, 353--354. [^38]: Cf. “In the early Roman imperial period, it was men, rather than women, on whom a woman’s clothing most reflected… The usual purpose of honoring women was to exalt the men to whom they were mothers, wives, or sisters” (Thiselton, 802). [^39]: Cf. Kistemaker, 376; Fee, 522. [^40]: An alternative translation of “messengers” would allow for simpler hermeneutics, however, the usage seems unlikely due to the number of times Paul uses ἀγγέλος as “angel” (four times in 1 Corinthians alone). Indeed, he seems to never use ἀγγέλος as “messenger.” The view that ἀγγέλος referred to priests, however, was held by Ephrem of Syria, Ambrosiaster, and Cajetan (Thiselton, 839). [^41]: Tertullian, *On Prayer*, ANF 3:688; cf. Genesis 6:1--2 [^42]: If the angels can see all things, then they would always be able to find immodestly dressed women. [^43]: 1 Timothy 5:2, cf. Ephesians 3:10 [^44]: Cf. Datiri, 1390. [^45]: Specifically, this is from the 2011 edition of the NIV, which changed the translation from “the woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head” (NIV 1984). [^46]: Kistemaker 375--376. [^47]: As do many translations and commentators, e.g., ESV, NASB, NKJV, NET, Calvin (358). [^48]: The NIV 2011 translation seems to follow Fee’s commentary (519--520). [^49]: Datiri, 1390. [^50]: Cf. Calvin, 355; MacArthur, 255; Fee, 530; Kistemaker, 371. 

---

# Bibliography

Ambrose. *Exposition of the Christian Faith.* Translated by H. De Romestin. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*10, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1994. 

---------. *On the Duties of the Clergy.* Translated by H. De Romestin. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*10, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999. 

---------. *On the Holy Spirit.* Translated by H. De Romestin. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*10, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999. 

Athanasius. *Against the Arians*. Translated by Archibald Robertson. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*10, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999. 

---------. *Defence of the Nicene Definition*. Translated by Archibald Robertson. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*10, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999. 

Calvin, John. *Commentary on the Epistles of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians*Vol. 1. Translated by John Pringle. Calvin’s Commentaries. Grand Rapids: Baker Books, 1999.

Carroll, B.H. *James, 1 and 2 Thessalonians, 1 and 2 Corinthians*. An Interpretation of the English Bible. Grand Rapids: Baker Book, 1973.

Cassian, John. *First Conference of Abbot Moses*. Translated by Edgar C. S. Gibson. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*11, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

Datiri, Dachollom. “1 Corinthians.” In *Africa Bible Commentary*, Edited by Tokunboh Adeyemo, 1377--1398. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2006.

Ellis, E. Earle. “Traditions in 1 Corinthians.” *New Testament Studies* 32, no. 4 (October 1986): 481--502.

Fee, Gordon D. *The First Epistle to the Corinthians*. New International Commentary on the New Testament. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1987.

Goodacre, Mark. “Does περιβόλαιον Mean ‘Testicle’ in 1 Corinthians 11:15?” *Journal of Biblical Literature* 130, no. 2 (2011): 391--396.

Grudem, Wayne. “Does κεφαλὴ (‘Head’) Mean ‘Source’ or ‘Authority Over’ in Greek Literature? A Survey of 2,336 Examples.” *Trinity Journal* ns 6.1 (Spring 1985): 38--59. 

Jerome. *Letter XXII*. Translated by W. H. Fremantle. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*6, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

---------. *Letter LI*. Translated by W. H. Fremantle. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*6, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

---------. *Letter CXLVII*. Translated by W. H. Fremantle. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*6, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

Kistemaker, Simon J. *1 Corinthians*. New Testament Commentary. Grand Rapids: Baker Books, 1993.

Larsen, Iver. “1 Corinthians 11.10 Revisited.” *The Bible Translator* 48, no. 3 (July, 1997): 345--350. 

MacArthur, John. *1 Corinthians*. MacArthur New Testament Commentary. Chicago: Moody, 1984.

Martin, Troy W. “Paul’s Argument from Nature for the Veil in 1 Corinthians 11:13--15: A Testicle Instead of a Head Covering.” *Journal of Biblical Literature* 123, no. 1 (2004): 75--84.

Metzger, Bruce Manning. *A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament*, 2<sup>nd</sup>**ed. New York: United Bible Societies, 1994.

Oster, Richard. “When Men Wore Veils to Worship: the Historical Context of 1 Corinthians 11.4.” *New Testament Studies* 34, no. 4 (October 1988): 481--505.

Sproul, R. C. *Knowing Scripture*, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed. Downers Grove, IL: IVP Books, 2009.

Tertullian. *Against Marcion*, Book V. Translated by Peter Holmes. In *Ante-Nicene Fathers*3, Edited by Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

---------. *On Prayer*. Translated by S. Thelwall. In *Ante-Nicene Fathers*3, Edited by Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

---------. *On the Veiling of Virgins*. Translated by S. Thelwall. In *Ante-Nicene Fathers* 4, Edited by Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

---------. *The Chaplet*. Translated by S. Thelwall. In *Ante-Nicene Fathers*3, Edited by Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

Theodoret. *The Ecclesiastical History*. Translated by Blomfield Jackson. In *Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers* 3, Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wace. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1999.

Thiselton, Anthony C. *The First Epistle to the Corinthians*. New International Greek Testament Commentary. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2000.

Wallace, Daniel B. *Greek Grammar: Beyond the Basics*. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996. 