---
layout: post
title: Will Moses Accuse You?
category: posts
tag: seminary
tagline: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Biblical Hermeneutics class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
---

<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5'>John 5</cite> covers multiple pericopes which convey an overarching meaning: Jesus is the foretold Son of God who does the will of the Father under the authority of the Father, even in matters of forgiveness, life, and death. Jesus demonstrates his authority through his healing at Bethesda, his recounting of his other works, and the testimony of John and the Father. 
After asking an invalid if he wanted to be healed, Jesus heals him with a simple verbal command (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:1-9'>vv. 1-9</cite>). Jesus spoke, the man heard and responded, and Jesus healed; this pericope demonstrates the truth that Jesus will expound later, that whoever hears his word and believes the Father will have life (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:24-27'>vv. 24-27</cite>). Because this healing occurred on the Sabbath, the Jewish leaders confronted the healed man and persecuted Jesus (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:10-18'>vv. 10-18</cite>). The Sabbath is a recurring conflict between the Pharisees and Jesus. While the Pharisees expect Jesus to do no good work on the Sabbath, Jesus decrees, "The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath," (Luke 6:5) and, "My Father is working until now, and I am working" (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:17'>v. 17</cite>). Through the Sabbath debate, Jesus proclaims that he is the Son of God who does the work of his Father.

Following this event, Jesus speaks to the Pharisees concerning his submission as the Son to the will of the Father through the overflow of mutual love (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:19-20'>vv. 19-20</cite>). The work of the Son reflects the will of the Father; those who believe the Son will have eternal life (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:21-24'>vv. 21-24</cite>). Through this pericope, both the Father and the Son have the power to raise the dead and give them life through the Son (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:21,24-29'>vv. 21, 24-29</cite>, cf. John 1:4, 6:57, 17:2). Daniel prophesied a final resurrection, both to everlasting life and everlasting contempt, which parallels Jesus' teaching at the end of this pericope (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:29'>v. 29</cite>, Daniel 12:2). The authority of death and life granted to the Son applies not only to the living, but to those already dead (cf. Deuteronomy 32:39; 2 Corinthians 1:9; Romans 4:17, 8:11).

In the final pericope of this chapter, Jesus' authority is backed by the witness of John the Baptist and God the Father through the Scriptures and Jesus' miraculous signs. God sent John the Baptist, whom the Jews received, to be the shining lamp announcing the arrival of the Son of God which was prophesied in Psalm 132:17 (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:32-35'>vv. 32-35</cite>). Furthermore, the Father gave Jesus works of signs so that his authority might be known. Throughout the Gospel of John, Jesus' miracles serve as a sign of his sonship and divinity (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:33-36'>vv. 33-36</cite>, cf. John 2:23, 10:25, 10:38, 14:11, 15:24). Jesus then moves to the most condemning part of his speech: Moses himself will accuse the Jewish leaders because they did not believe his writings prophesying Jesus as the Son of God (<cite class='bibleref' title='John 5:37-47'>vv. 37-47</cite>, cf. Acts 13:27). Jesus expressly teaches that the whole of the Old Testament scriptures prophesy and teach about himself, the Son of God. Therefore, those who do not believe that Jesus is the Messiah neither believe Moses nor know the Father.

Through multiple means, <cite class='bibleref' title='John 5'>John 5</cite> shows that all Scripture teaches that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, who does the will of his Father. The prophesies of the Old Testament and the accounts of the New all point to Jesus being the Lord. The significance of the text is that we ought to believe all of the testimony supporting that Jesus is the Son of God who does the will of the Father concerning forgiveness, life, and death.
