--- 
title: Nine Marks of a Healthy Church
layout: post
category: reviews
tag: [seminary, fbc-durham]
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Andrew Davis' Pastoral Internship class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: "<cite>Nine Marks of a Healthy Church</cite>. New Expanded Edition. By Mark Dever. Crossway, 2004, 287 pp., $15.99."
rating: "3 / 5"
buy:
    amazon: B00EHMMHWG
image:
    feature: /reviews/nine-marks-rev.jpg
description: "The following is a collection of weekly, chapter-by-chapter reflection essays interacting with this influential book. Despite any quibbling, I continue to be blessed by the work of Mark Dever and the ministry of 9Marks."
keywords: [9Marks, "Nine Marks of a Healthy Church", "Mark Dever",  evangelism, gospel, polity, church]
date: 2014-05-16T8:00-4:00
---

*The following is a collection of weekly, chapter-by-chapter reflection essays interacting with this influential book.*

# 1. Expositional Preaching

Mark Dever's first mark of a healthy church is rightly related to the centrality of the Word in the life of the church. Although Dever titles this chapter, "Expositional Preaching", his primary emphasis is on the centrality of the Word itself. Dever writes, "A healthy church is a church that hears the Word of God and continues to hear the Word of God" (p. 51). Specifically, Dever argues for the centrality of the Word as expressed through expositional preaching, writing, "The congregation's commitment to the centrality of the Word coming from the front, from the preacher, the one specially gifted by God and called to do that ministry, is the most important thing you can look for in a church" (p. 52).

Given Dever's emphasis, I wish this mark would be called "The Centrality of the Word". (Dever spends more time arguing for the centrality of the Word in this chapter than for expositional preaching.) In my opinion, it would be more helpful to promote the centrality of the Word through expositional preaching *and* other Word-centered practices. There are many ways to be Word-centered that are complementary to expositional preaching: the public reading of Scripture, encouraging the private reading of Scripture, prioritizing the Word in biblical counseling, utilizing the Word in discipleship, and proclaiming the Word in evangelism. These and more are expressions of a church's commitment to the centrality of the Word. I agree with Dever on much in this chapter; this quibble is between two who agree that the Word is central and that expository preaching is the most effective method of Word-centered preaching.

One concern I have with this chapter is Dever's line, "My main role, and the main role of any pastor, is expositional preaching" (p. 39). Unfortunately, Dever's full intention is not clear. Is he describing the role of all pastors and elders or just "senior pastors"? Surely expositional preaching itself cannot be the main role of every pastor or elder in a church. Even the senior pastor, who may be charged with the main teaching ministry of the church, must pastor his flock in many significant ways besides preaching. 

Rather, let's promote Word-centered pastoring (and preaching) in a Word-centered church. As Dever himself writes, "If you get the priority of the Word established, then you have in place the single most important aspect of the church's life" (p. 39). In the end, Mark Dever rightly emphasizes both the centrality of the Word and the importance of expositional preaching. Despite my quibbling, we seem to agree in whole on the significance of both of these inter-related marks of a healthy church. Expositional preaching is indeed one mark of a healthy church.

# 2. Biblical Theology

Dever's second mark of a healthy church is what he terms biblical theology. While the academic discipline of biblical theology includes identifying the unique theologies of different authors and books of the Bible, Dever uses the term to describe a biblically accurate theology, i.e., a theology reflecting the metanarrative of the Scripture. Specifically, he summarizes the content of such a theology by asserting that God is creating, holy, faithful, loving, and sovereign. The majority of the chapter is dedicated to explaining the content and importance of each of these attributes of God.

Surprisingly, the author does not write many words applying biblical theology to church life but rather lays out his summary of biblical theology. Indeed, his ecclesiological application could be summarized thus: "We will 'do church' differently depending on how we understand God and ourselves" (p. 66). Obviously, Dever's point is that a church must  have a biblical theology in order to become healthy.

While one could quibble over what makes up a biblical theology, Dever writes well enough for a one-chapter overview. I was surprised, however, by the Calvinistic overtones throughout the chapter. Even when writing on God's creation, Dever simultaneously emphasizes God's election, concluding, "The history recorded in the Bible shows us very plainly that God is a creating God and that He is an electing God" (p. 62). Regarding God's sovereignty, he later writes, "For confessing Christians to resist the idea of God's sovereignty in creation or salvation is really to flirt with pious paganism" (p. 72). While I would generally agree with Dever on such doctrines (and affirm what he explicitly wrote in the chapter), I understand why those of different soteriological persuasions may have difficulty endorsing 9Marks' ecclesiology. I am left to wonder if such a narrow summary of biblical theology is necessary for a book promoting church health.

For a topic many find to be dry and hardly applicable to daily life, Dever aptly reminds his reader why biblical theology is necessary for a healthy ecclesiology, "How you think about God impacts the way you live and what you want your church to be like" (p. 72). Those who already enjoy theology and love the church are predisposed to agree with Dever's point; however, others may find the argumentation lacking. Again, I find it concerning that Dever might actually be alienating the very audience he intends to reach. While, I personally agree with the thrust of the chapter, I wish space allowed for Dever to more fully articulate an apologetic for the necessity of a biblical theology in the life of a healthy church.[^1]

# 3. The Gospel

Mark Dever introduces his chapter on the gospel, writing, "If you going to agree with just one chapter in this book, this is probably a good one to agree with" (p. 79); I concur. In Deverian fashion,[^2] the author works through an explanation of the gospel by identifying what it *is not* by using four anti-definitions: (1) The good news is not simply that we are okay, (2) The good news is not simply that God is love, (3) The good news is not simply that Jesus wants to be our friend, and (4) The good news is not simply that we should live right. Working through these wrong definitions, Dever ultimately describes the gospel as, "the Good News of Christ's death on the Cross as an atoning sacrifice for the sins of all those who would ever turn and trust in Him" (p. 93).

Personally, I most appreciated the author's identification of the types of language Scripture uses to describe the work of Christ's death, namely, economic, relational, legal, and military. This one page overview was helpful in quickly describing the breadth of Christ's work on the cross; this easily could be used in evangelism. Restating that Jesus paid for our sins, made us right with God, removed our guilt before God, and conquered sin and death is an excellent exercise in explaining the good news of Jesus Christ.

I was once again surprised in this chapter by the lack of explicit application to a local church. Indeed, the only mention of the local church is that, in his own church, Dever asks any prospective members to explain the gospel in 60 seconds. However, this one nugget of insight is helpful to churches seeking to have more meaningful membership (which is another mark under Dever's scheme). Despite this lack of explicit application, the implicit point of the chapter is true enough: churches must believe the gospel in order to have any chance of health. The gospel Dever presents is one and the same with the one that our churches must believe. Indeed, Dever leaves his readers with the reflective questions, "Have we heard the Gospel? Have we believed it with our lives or are we still playing at religion? . . . What better news could you hear?" (p. 95)

# 4. A Biblical Understanding of Conversion 

As his fourth mark for healthy churches, Mark Dever asserts that such churches must teach a biblical understanding of conversion. In an effort to convince the reader of this necessity, Dever asks and answers the following questions: (1) Is change needed? (2) Is change really possible? (3) What change is needed? (4) What will this change involve? and (5) How does this great change happen? Throughout, the author appropriately identifies the biblical teaching on conversion under the structural framework of the above questions.

Dever aptly balances God's work in salvation alongside man's necessary response. He best explained this by referencing Joel 2:32, which asserts both "Everyone who calls on the name of the LORD will be saved" and "there will be deliverance . . . among the survivors whom the LORD calls" (NIV 1984). Such an emphasis on this simultaneous work in conversion is necessary in order to avoid the extremes Dever so readily identifies: where we do *everything* and where we do *nothing at all*.

Regarding local churches, Dever contends that our churches are filled with people who (1) are saved and believe they are not and (2) are not saved and believe they are. Both problems are the painful result of not teaching a proper understanding of conversion. As I expect to see in future chapters, matters are made worse when the problematic people from group 2 are vocal, voting members of a church. A biblical understanding of conversion is inherently tied to regenerate church membership and church discipline, especially for those churches that are congregationally governed. Without the proper coupling of all three, a congregational church will suffer in health because the unregenerate participate in the governance of the local church.

Overall, this chapter presents a message of hope and change. The good news of the gospel converts our very hearts. Through the Church preaching the message of the Bible, the Spirit does the work of conversion and gives the gift of faith to those who are dead in their sins so that they respond and are saved. This message of God's work in the gospel and our necessary response to his calling will guide local churches toward health. 

# 5. A Biblical Understanding of Evangelism

Most succinctly, Dever states that under the biblical understanding, "Evangelism is a declaration of the Gospel to individual men and women" (p. 134). Through this chapter, Dever tackles the topic of evangelism by answering the questions: (1) Who should evangelize? (2) How should we evangelize? (3) What is evangelism? and (4) Why should we evangelize?

Throughout the chapter, Dever emphasizes God's role in evangelism and conversion and the joy we should have in obeying God's call for us to evangelize. Dever writes, "I hope we will at least find that we can be more understanding and obedient ourselves and have a healthier church culture when it comes to our great calling to evangelize" (p. 121). Dever rightly emphasizes Paul's example for us, that he was "eager to preach the gospel" (Rom. 1:15), and the example of the early church in which all the members were proclaiming the gospel message. Dever's emphasis on every-member-evangelism as depicted in Acts ought to provide encouragement to churches today. In light of the persistent evangelism by the apostles, disciples, and church body in Acts, we may perceive that the early church fully understood the Great Commission as a command for all disciples of Christ (p. 122).

Regarding methods of evangelism, Dever helpfully explains that our presentation of the gospel ought to be given with honesty, urgency, and joy. Indeed, each of these attributes is necessary for a meaningful communication of the gospel. Without honesty, our message will be distorted, often forgoing the cost of discipleship. Without urgency, our hearers may perceive that they have time to delay their decision. Without joy, we fail to communicate the radical happiness given to us through the gospel by the indwelling Spirit. Keeping these three traits in mind (honesty, urgency, and joy) will help any Christian keep an appropriate mood, tone, and articulation of the gospel message.

Later, Dever emphasizes the overarching motivation in evangelism of the glory of God. Loving God and loving others ought to be our first two priorities in sharing the gospel of Christ (p. 138). Through these two loves, our evangelism ought to be aimed at creating true disciples of the one true God. As Dever rightly notes, "We need to see an end to a wrong, shallow view of evangelism as simply getting people to say yes to a question, or to make a one-time decision" (p. 143). Indeed, our proclamation of a truncated gospel does not show a love for God and others; such a messages minimizes God and is a danger to our hearers.

Finally, Dever writes, "we need to see a renewed commitment to, and joy in, the great privilege we have of sharing the Good News of Christ with the lost and dying world around us" (p. 143--144). Let us petition the Father for laborers in the field and work with joy in sowing the seed of the good news. May we also encourage our fellow disciples to make disciples with joy, out of love for God and neighbor.

# 6. A Biblical Understanding of Church Membership

Mark Dever emphasizes the importance of church membership for local churches today. Church membership is a commitment of individuals to join together into a local church, representing the visible Body of Christ. Dever believes that a biblical approach to church membership "is a key step in revitalizing our churches, evangelizing our nation, furthering the cause of Christ around the world, and so bringing glory to God" (p. 149). Indeed, local church membership appears to be an underlying assumption in the New Testament writing; clarifying its meaning and purpose for the church today is essential for church health.

Dever briefly defines a church as a "local collection of Christians committed to Christ and to each other" (p. 150). With this definition of church in view, he then identifies five reasons for joining a church: (1) to assure ourselves, (2) to evangelize the world, (3) to expose false gospels, (4) to edify the church, and (5) to glorify God. In my opinion, Dever's most significant reason to join a church is that "membership in a local church is intended as a testimony to our membership in the universal church" (p. 152). Often called "regenerate church membership," this concept is essential to a healthy view of church polity and membership. One's membership in a local church ought to reflect the church's affirmation of one's own salvation. No one living an unchristian life ought to be affirmed as a Christian through membership in a local church. The affirmation of regeneration in church members is even more important in congregational churches where members have governing authority in the church.

Regarding the duties of church membership, Dever writes, "church membership entails a life of repentance and belief" (p. 159). Here, Dever also promotes the signing and observation of a church covenant. Referencing his own church, Dever expects church members to regularly (1) attend services, (2) attend communion, (3) attend members' meetings, (4) pray, and (5) give. While these are minimal expectations, I wonder if other duties ought to be explicitly included, e.g. serving others or evangelizing. Regardless, these types of expectations help prospective members count the cost of membership and help current members remember their commitment.

# 7. Biblical Church Discipline

Because this mark has been neglected for so many decades in many of our churches, Dever's seventh mark is perhaps the first one with which some Christians will have serious disagreement. Furthermore, a affirming many of the prior marks is a prerequisite for understanding biblical church discipline. In particular, one must have a biblical understanding of the gospel, conversion, and church membership before one can be convinced of the merit of biblical church discipline.

Dever differentiates between corrective (negative) discipline and formative (positive) discipline. Church discipline is often associated only with corrective discipline; however, formative discipline is essential in the life of a healthy church. Furthermore, formative discipline through the proclamation of the Word, service in the church, and accountability with one another will keep many in the church from needing severe corrective discipline. Formative church discipline is a blessing to all and ought to be the focus of our discipline within the church.

Dever cites eight New Testament passages providing instruction for corrective discipline. First is Jesus' instruction regarding the confrontation of members who have unrepentant sin (Matt. 18:15--17). At every turn, the goal of church discipline is repentance and restoration; this is the best possible result of corrective church discipline! Although we hope that formative church discipline will mitigate sin and the early stages of corrective church discipline will bring repentance, even excommunication is done with the ultimate hope for restoration between this person and the church (1 Cor. 5:5).

Further support for corrective church discipline is found in Christian history. Dever does well to argue the importance of church discipline to prior generations of churches. Indeed, "pastors of the early 1900s clearly considered their most important tasks to be faithfully preaching the Word and faithfully administering godly discipline" (p. 179). Unfortunately, discipline faded away from our churches amidst shifting priorities in the mission of the church.

Regarding motivation for church discipline Dever writes, "Corrective church discipline is never to be done out of meanness of spirit but only out of a love" for the offender, the church, and God" (p. 187). Even with this in view, some need convincing of the temporal and eternal benefits of church discipline, therefore, Dever lists five reasons to practice church discipline: (1) for the good of the person disciplined, (2) for the good of the other Christians as they see the danger of sin, (3) for the health of the church as a whole, (4) for the corporate witness of the church, and (5) for the glory of God as we reflect his holiness.

Through biblical and practical arguments, Dever makes a strong case for  churches to return to the practice of discipline. Indeed, many churches and many Christians will need such convincing in order to return to this biblical practice. However, we must all understand, as did J. L. Dagg, that, "When discipline leaves a church, Christ goes with it" (p. 192).

# 8. A Concern for Discipleship and Growth

In his eighth mark, Dever emphasizes the importance of growth in the church. Primarily, Dever emphasizes the importance of individual growth within the corporate body. In light of the church-growth movement, Dever seems hesitant to emphasize numerical growth as an indicator of health. Indeed, Dever is put in a tough spot because numbers, which are so easily measured (or falsified), are an inadequate measure of Christian growth. Numerical growth only provides value alongside spiritual growth. Just as a decrease in spiritual health does not always correlate with numerical decrease, an increase in spiritual health does not always correlate with numerical increase. Both measurements can be helpful, but spiritual growth if vastly superior to numerical indications.

Dever is right to argue, "A healthy church is characterized by a serious concern for spiritual growth on the part of its members" (p. 198). Furthermore, his concern for "baby Christians" who never grow into spiritual maturity is valid for today's church, especially those most influenced by the church-growth and seeker-sensitive movements. Indeed, an unbiblical view of conversion and evangelism can lead a church to being filled with carnal Christians (who are not Christian at all) and baby Christians who never progress in spiritual knowledge and maturity.

Dever concludes, "If we are to grow as individual believers and as churches, we must sit under the Word" (p. 216). In many ways, this captures the essence of Dever's book. Each mark is oriented around a biblical understanding of church practice. The Word leads us to right thought, action, and relationship; therefore, the church is lost without the revelation of God, the faith handed down through the ages. In order to grow in spiritual health, churches and Christians must grow in "the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God" (Eph. 4:13 [ESV]).

# 9. Biblical Church Leadership

The first third of Dever's chapter on Biblical Church Leadership argues the merits of congregationalism. While I found this surprising, this was a valuable beginning to a chapter ultimately arguing for elder leadership. I have had conversations with Baptists who believe that elder leadership somehow denies congregationalism. While elder-rule conflicts with congregationalism, congregationalism is equally compatible with a staff-pastor leadership model as it is with a multiple-elder leadership model. However, congregationalism under elder-leadership is often structured differently than such rule under staff-leadership. For instance, the use of committees, boards, and deacons will often manifest differently under these two leadership models. However, congregationalism and elder-leadership are fully compatible as long as elders and deacons are elected  and the congregation approves all significant decisions in the functioning of the church

I found Dever's section on charismatic leadership particularly helpful. He teaches that church members ought to use their *charismata* (spiritual gifts) for the edification of the church. Each member should exercise his  spiritual gifts in a way that prioritizes the church body over himself. Dever adds, "As a church, leadership is exercised in a covenanted congregational context that is specially equipped by God" (p. 236). Because the church is equipped, members must use their gifts for the edification of the church and the proclamation of the gospel.

I was surprised to find very few pages in this chapter actually dedicated to the debated topic of multiple-elders. While the content of the whole chapter was edifying and accurate, the argument for a plurality of elders was not given as much space as other topics. However, Dever has good reason to spend more time on these other important aspects of leadership: the quality and function of leaders is more significant than the structure of leadership. Although proper structures can inculcate better leaders, poor leaders will cause problems under any system of leadership and governance. Therefore, in a book about church health, Dever is right to focus more on the installation of prepared leaders than on the establishment on proper systems.

# Conclusion

Having been familiar with the influence of this book and the work of 9Marks Ministries, I was blessed to read this book for a third time. However, I was disappointed that I did not have the opportunity to read the third edition of this text. Regardless, in my reading I can see how 9Marks has expanded past the content of this book. While this book may have started a movement, it no longer captures the full significance of the ministry of 9Marks. Even regarding the *Nine Marks*, 9Marks and Crossway are publishing [individual books][series] tackling each mark. 

Despite any quibbling in the above paragraphs, I continue to be blessed by the work of Mark Dever and the ministry of 9Marks. May God bless them and the fruit of their labor.

[^1]: I imagine Michael Lawrence likely accomplishes this very task in his 9Marks published book, *Biblical Theology in the Life of the Church: A Guide for Ministry*. 

[^2]: That is, Dever uses the same method for explaining the gospel in the chapter "What is the Gospel?" of a later book. Mark Dever, *The Gospel and Personal Evangelism* (Wheaton: Crossway, 2007), 31--42. 

[series]: http://www.amazon.com/s/ref=nb_sb_noss_2?url=search-alias%3Daps&field-keywords=9Marks%3A+Building+Healthy+Churches&rh=i%3Aaps%2Ck%3A9Marks%3A+Building+Healthy+Churches&tag=vernonking-20