---
layout: post
title: The Intended End of Theology
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology I class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: What is the intended end of Christian theology?
description: The intended end of Christian theology is personally and communally knowing the God who has revealed himself in his Word. 
keywords: [Knowing, God, Christian, theology, communal, community, revelation]
---

The intended end of Christian theology is personally and communally knowing the God who has revealed himself in his Word. A person's knowing God is the ultimate good that can be achieved from any study of theology. Knowing God must be done communally because God has created for himself a Bride, the Church, outside of which no one is saved. Finally, the known God must be the God revealed in the Word of God because any other god is false and a lie.

Christian theology, whose end is knowing God, is strongly contrasted to religious studies, whose end is articulating the propositional truth claims of a particular faith. Such religious study does not seek to experience or have faith, but rather attempts to observe as an outsider. Without faith, the end of the religious student is like "those who are perishing, because they refused to love the truth and so be saved" (2 Thes. 2:10 [ESV]). Studying the Christian God, while refusing to have faith in him, has the end of one believing what is false, and thus being condemned (cf. 2 Thes. 2:11--12). However, the end of Christian theology is personally knowing God because the beginning of Christian theology is having faith in God. By receiving the faith passed down through the ages, one truly begins the journey of Christian theology.

The end of Christian theology is personally knowing God within a community of other believers who also know God. Jesus Christ has one Bride, the Church, whom he will wed in the eschaton. Because the Messiah has only one Bride, a believer cannot be united with Christ without being part of his Bride. While an individual's faith is necessary for his own salvation, an individualistic faith refuses to participate in the cost of discipleship and the benefit of the Body.  For this reason, the author of Hebrews encourages all to meet together, especially as the Day draws near (Heb. 10:25). Without the community of faith, one's faith is more likely to falter and, ultimately, fail without the encouragement and exhortation of the brethren. Therefore, the end of Christian theology is both personally and communally knowing God.

The Christian God to be known in Christian theology is the God who has revealed himself through the written Word and the living Word. Our Holy Scripture, the Bible, is God's self-revelation of himself to the world. One must utilize this special revelation in order both to know God and grow in knowledge of him. Without the study of Scripture, one's theology will inevitably reflect a different god than the true God, who has delivered through his Word the truth about himself. In a similar manner, Jesus Christ is the incarnation of God in the world; he is the visible image of the invisible God. Both the Word written and the Word made flesh are the revelation of God. The former can be studied and the latter can be known. By looking upon the Messiah depicted in Scripture, we see the Father; by knowing Jesus, we know God. Therefore, the intended end of Christian theology is knowing the God who has been revealed by the Word of God.

Christian theology is the experiential knowing of the subject of the Christian faith, realized by believing Christians living in Christian community. This subject is God himself, his attributes, and his work of reconciling the world to himself. The beginning of theology is faith in the Triune God as described in the gospel and the source of theology is the Word of God. Therefore, the intended end of Christian theology is personally and communally knowing the God who has revealed himself by his Word. 
