---
layout: post
title: Eating the Forbidden Fruit
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology II class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: Why was it a sin to eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil?
description: Why was it a sin to eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil? Simply put, it was sinful because it was disobeying a divine command from God.
keywords: [sin, Adam, Eve, garden, Eden, command, obey, temptation, devil]
---

When God placed the man in the Garden of Eden, he permitted him to eat the fruit of every tree in the garden other than the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, lest he die (Gen. 2:15--17). Despite being given one simple command (which positively encouraged the man to eat of all but one tree!) the man and woman embraced the temptation of the devil and ate of the fruit of the forbidden tree. The man and woman's action was sinful for one reason alone: God expressly forbade eating this fruit. The man and woman sinned against God when they disobeyed his commandment.

Prior to eating the fruit, the man and woman lived in sinless goodness. They were naked together and unashamed (Gen. 2:25). They had no knowledge of good and evil because they were blissfully ignorant of the distinction; they only knew their experience, which was a good life in a good garden. However, sometime after creation (and after the fall of the devil), the woman was tempted by the serpent to disobey God. However, the woman did not sin when she was tempted to disobey God, for the consequence of sin did not come upon her until she and the man ate of the fruit (Gen. 3:7). Rather, the act of eating the fruit was itself sin because the act consummated the desire begun by the temptation of the devil. Only by eating of the fruit did the woman and man actually commit sin.

Given the warning of God regarding the fruit of this tree, perhaps the tree could also be called the tree of death, a stark contrast to the other specially named tree in the garden, the tree of life. However, this tree was created by God in the garden he had declared to be good. Therefore, neither the fruit nor the tree could have been evil in itself. If the tree and fruit were not evil and the man and woman sinned by eating the fruit, then the sin must have been due to the action of their disobedience of God's command. Thus, if God had not commanded the man to abstain from the fruit of the tree, then the man and woman would not have sinned when eating the fruit.

Notably, the woman was created after God had given the command to the man regarding the fruit of the tree (Gen. 2:17, 22). Indeed, the command she communicated to the serpent was not quite the command given by God to the man: it included the added prohibition, "neither shall you touch it" (Gen. 3:3). Presumably, the man miscommunicated with the woman regarding the instruction from God. Even though there is no account of the woman receiving a direct prohibition from God, and though she knew only a modified version of the command, the woman was still held accountable by God to obey the command he had given. The woman understood the impetus of the command, but not the specifics, yet she was still condemned once she disobeyed the original command given to the man.

The man and woman sinned when they ate of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil because they consciously succumbed to the temptation of the devil and deliberately went against the will of God.  The fruit of the tree was amoral, but the prohibition of God made the act of eating of it immoral. By disobeying God, the man and woman sinned. Each person prioritized his or her will over God’s and both were given the punishment about which God had warned them, namely, death.