---
title: Defining Christian Theology
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
description: "Christian theology is a culturally appropriate retelling of the gospel of Jesus Christ according to the Scriptures. Christian theology begins with faith, starts with baptism, is sourced in Scripture, ends in spiritual formation, and produces the fruit of doctrine."
keywords: [Christian, theology, community, doctrine, "historical theology", "philosophical theology", "historical theology", "systematic theology", apologetics, "biblical theology"]
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology I class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: Define Christian Theology. Explain in detail and contrast with other theological disciplines.
published: false
---

Christian theology is a culturally appropriate retelling of the gospel of Jesus Christ according to the Scriptures. Christian theology begins with faith, starts with baptism, is sourced in Scripture, ends in spiritual formation, and produces the fruit of doctrine. Christian theology is a discipline by the Christian community for the sake of the Christian community to the end of knowing God and becoming conformed to the image of Christ.

First, let's consider other types of Christian theological method. Biblical theology is an attempt to understand how each part of the biblical text speaks about God and his work. In this field, one may attempt to parse out the theology of individual authors or compare the theology of the Old Testament to that of the New Testament. Particularly, the goal is to understand how the individual biblical writers speak and think about God. However, our task as Christian theologians is not to look at individual parts of Scripture, but to consider the whole that emerges from these parts.

Philosophical theology attempts to answer the universal meta-questions such as "Is there a God?" This type of theology is sometimes considered apologetic because it seeks to answer questions which might be universally common to all people. However, Christian theology is concerned with explaining the Christian conception of God within the Christian faith, not in contrasting our articulation with others. We do not have to ask, "Is there a God?" because we already know him and his trinitarian nature.

Historical theology examines how individuals throughout history of understood God and his work. This looks to those who considered themselves Christians throughout history (including heretics) and catalogues the perspectives of individuals or eras. While historical theology helps us to be careful in avoiding heresy, it is not Christian theology because it is not an attempt at explaining the story of Scripture.

Systematic theology is the attempt to catalog and categorize those things that believers and biblical writers say about God and his work. This catalog is then systematized so that one might be able to focus specifically on the theology of any particular topic, e.g., the doctrine of Christ or the doctrine of the Church. Christian theology is different from systematic theology because our task is to explain the whole of theology, not just individual components throughout.

To define Christian theology positively, consider again our definition: "Christian theology is a culturally appropriate retelling of the gospel of Jesus Christ according to the Scriptures." Christian theology must be culturally appropriate because our audience must be able to understand our speech about God. The words and symbols we use must be understandable to the people to whom we are speaking in order for the practice to be profitable. Theology requires that we use a common meaning behind these words and symbols; this shared meaning is necessary in order to have any chance at meaningful dialogue. We cannot avoid the culture in which we operate; we must communicate within it.

Christian theology is a retelling of the gospel because it cannot be a recitation of it. We do not have the time or ability to repeat verbatim the text of Scripture every time we would like to discuss it. Therefore, we have to retell parts of the story while understanding how the parts fit into the whole. For Christian theology, this retelling involves translation, explanation, and summary. We need to translate because the original text of Scripture is in a language most do not understand. We need to explain because many of the details will be lost on those who do not understand the biblical context. Finally, we must summarize because it is necessary for sharing the story of Scripture. In retelling stories to people who already know them, we are able to summarize, even in single words or symbols, for those who are familiar.

We are retelling the gospel of Jesus Christ according to the Scriptures because we must operate within the bounds of the self-revelation of God. The very confession of Scripture is that God is at work in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. When we see Jesus as described in Scripture we have seen the Father. This limits the story of Christian theology to Jesus, the Christ, the Son of the living God as presented in Scripture. As Christian theologians, we are not looking to interpret Jesus through sources other than the Bible, even though there are many. We are simply concerned with what the Bible says about Jesus and how the Scripture itself interprets his work. 

Furthermore, the Scripture provides an authoritative source for information. We limit the source of our knowledge about God to Scripture read as the story of Jesus Christ. More narrowly, Christian theology is the study of the Christian God revealed in the Bible, studied through the Bible. Ultimately, as Christian theologians, we are going to focus our attention on the story of the written text of Scripture as it presents to us the good news of God in Christ reconciling the world to himself.
