---
layout: post
category: journal
tag: seminary
title: Reflections from SBC 2014
desciption: "Repeated themes of the SBC include racial reconciliation and ethnic diversity, church planting and revitalization, a call to evangelism, and mixed emotions regarding slipping membership and baptismal numbers."
keywords: [SBC, "southern baptist convention", southeastern, "Paige Patterson", southwestern]
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Nathan Finn's Southern Baptist Convention class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
date: 2014-06-23T21:00-4:00
---

# Convention Floor

The core of the Southern Baptist Convention is that which occurs on the convention floor every year. This includes reports from SBC entities, elections for various SBC officers, and opportunities for motions and resolutions. Music, homilies, and sermons are scattered throughout what would otherwise be a business meeting, making the SBC an odd sort of worship service.

## Tuesday Morning

The Southern Baptist Convention officially started at 8AM Tuesday morning. That morning included the Crossover Evangelism report, an event in which I had participated the week prior, and reports from GuideStone and the International Mission Board. Significant business of  the morning also included the election of officers, the introduction of new motions, and the first Executive Committee report.

Immediately following the first prayer of the morning, a chaplain led the convention in the Pledge of Allegiance. Although I understand the historical sentiments for this decision, I find it troublesome that the Southern Baptist Convention would act together to pledge itself to the flag of a nation-state. In order to make progress in being a multi-national convention, we must consider the cessation of American centric customs and rituals. The Convention this year featured pastors from other nations, including Cuba and Canada---why should we exclude these brothers in Christ by pledging ourselves to an earthly republic? We are citizens of a heavenly kingdom and our convention does not belong to the United States government.

The first election of SBC officers was for the office of President of the SBC. Al Mohler, president of Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, offered a compelling nomination speech for Ronnie Floyd, emphasizing Floyd's long-tenured service to the Southern Baptist Convention. Following, Dwight McKissic nominated Dennis Kim, a Maryland pastor, emphasizing Kim’s persistence in prayer, the diversity of his congregation, as well as his own diverse background. Finally, Deacon Billy Smith nominated his pastor, Jared Moore, delivering an underwhelming speech emphasizing that Moore is an average pastor. Significantly, Smith emphasized that his small church of 60 members contributes 16% of its income to the Cooperative Program.

The election of the 2014 SBC President occurred immediately following these nominating speeches. While planned nominations are available through Baptist Press before the convention, I had not researched any of the candidates and felt unprepared to vote on these men. I knew almost nothing about each nominee outside of that which was presented in the nominating speech. Indeed, the experience of the presidential election was merely the first of many times in which I felt ill equipped to vote. To truly be a prepared voter at the SBC one must seek out information prior through the Baptist Press.

Furthermore, I was surprised that the presidential election was the only one in which there were multiple nominees. No other office required a vote because each had only one nominee. Because anyone can bring forward a nomination, I honestly do not understand why the convention only nominates one person for so many offices.

During the time for new motions, I experienced the motion-making machine that is Wiley Drake, pastor and messenger from First Southern Baptist Church and Messianic Fellowship of Buena Park, California. He made multiple motions including that the SBC join "Operation American Spring" to promote the impeachment of Barack Obama, join the July 4 "Celebrate Racial Reconciliation" on the battlefield of Gettysburg, and discipline a non-SBC church in La Mirada, California for its position on homosexuality. 

## Tuesday Afternoon

The afternoon session included more music, more reports, and more elections. The Executive Committee offered a second report that was mostly an extended advertisement for the Cooperative Program, featuring testimonials from mega-church pastors from across the nation.

Unique to this afternoon was the Committee on Resolutions in which a member of the committee announced the number and title of a resolution, and then moved to a floor vote. This being my first SBC, I had no idea what was going on, but quickly ascertained that the resolution text was in a printout that was made available after lunch. After missing the content of the first two resolutions, I was able to speed-read through the RESOLVED sections of the remaining resolutions in order to be moderately informed before voting. Personally, I was disappointed in how unprepared I was and dismayed at the likelihood that so many others were also voting without being sufficiently informed.

## Wednesday Morning

The second day of the SBC did not tend to follow the pre-printed schedule because there was an unexpected lack of business at hand. The day before, messengers made relatively few motions and most of those were referred to entities or ruled out of order. Indeed, so much extra time was available that the schedule was modified to include 45 minutes of corporate prayer. For nearly an hour, thousands of messengers prayed to God for the proclamation of the gospel, the strengthening of churches, and the salvation of souls. This was one of the best moments of the SBC and encouraged my heart regarding the direction of our convention. Rather than adjourn early in order to get to lunch sooner, the SBC officers and messengers decided to pray together for the work of the gospel.

## Wednesday Afternoon

By Wednesday afternoon, only two hours remained on the agenda. At this point, many of the messengers had already departed, deeming the presentation of new officers. However, some messengers remained at the convention only for the anticipated drama of Southwestern Seminary’s report due to President Patterson’s admission of a Muslim student into its Archaeology PhD program. In order to stem the tide, a messenger asked a planted question regarding Southwestern’s work in Texas prisons and the necessity of admitting into its prison-program all types of students (regardless of faith background) due to equal opportunity requirements. 

Despite the long answer from Dr. Patterson, time still remained for one messenger to ask the President to explain his reasoning behind admitting the Muslim student, despite the by-laws requiring all students to hold to Southwestern’s statement of faith. Patterson gave an emotional response, emphasizing the evangelistic nature of his decision to admit a promising Muslim archaeologist from Palestine. In doing so, Patterson admitted to a number of instances at other schools in which he had made exceptions for non-Christian students in order to win them for Christ. Dr. Patterson apparently won the hearts of many messengers as he received applause throughout the convention center. Unfortunately, the messengers were applauding a man for breaking the by-laws of an institution that is accountable to the SBC. I am curious what will occur regarding Patterson and this incident at the next meeting for the Southwestern Board of Trustees in September. I would not be surprised to see Patterson retire before the next convention.

# Credentials Committee

Through an invitation extended to my fellow seminarians, I volunteered for the Credentials Committee at the SBC. This committee is in charge of confirming the credentials of unregistered messengers in order to keep the floor votes legitimate. As part of this committee, I helped unregistered messengers complete their registration by checking their respective church’s giving to the SBC and to make sure the church had not reached its cap of ten messengers. I enjoyed the opportunity to serve the SBC in this way. This service has also inclined me to volunteer for various roles at future conventions, whenever I next attend.

# Auxiliary Events

In addition to the official business of the convention, many auxiliary events occurred before and during the days of the convention. The SBC Pastor’s Conference occurred before the convention and many other events occurred during convention breaks. If one so desired, it seems one could have eaten every meal during the convention at one event or another. 

## Executive Committee

I enjoyed taking a behind-the-scenes look at the Executive Committee with my class on Monday. I felt especially privileged that members of the committee stayed afterward in order to further educate us seminarians about their processes. Before this informative meeting, I hardly knew who was on the Executive Committee or what they did.

## Gospel Project Breakfast

LifeWay sponsored a free breakfast on Tuesday to promote its Gospel Project series of publications. I attended primarily because they were giving away 20 books. The breakfast included a panel discussion on Calvinism between Frank Page (the Executive Committee President who has written against Calvinism), Trevin Wax (a blogging Amyraldian), and David Platt (a popular author and Calvinist). Ed Stetzer moderated the panel. Hearing a frank discussion on this divisive issue proved helpful in highlighting the way these camps tend to talk past each other. As Platt pointed out, although sharing the same theological language, they are applying different definitions to terms such as sovereignty, control, choice, and free will. Honestly, I was shocked that Dr. Page, in one of his final remarks, quipped that people whom God *wanted in heaven* are in hell because of a lack of evangelism, as if our disobedience thwarts the plan of God.[^1] More disturbing was Stetzer’s addition of statistical insight that most of the SBC believes the same as Page.

[^1]: See <http://www.bpnews.net/bpnews.asp?id=42805>.

## Baptist21 Lunch

For lunch on Tuesday, I attended a panel sponsored by Baptist21 moderated by Jonathan Akin, featuring Al Mohler, Danny Akin, Thom Rainer, David Platt, and Matt Chandler. Unfortunately, seating was so limited that I missed the first 10 minutes trying to grab my lunch and find a seat. I think the panel could have been interesting, but I had trouble hearing in the crowded room.

## Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission Panel

Before dinner on Tuesday, I attended the ERLC panel with Russ Moore and Matt Chandler, moderated by Phillip Bethancourt. In this helpful panel, Chandler and Moore answered ethical questions from the audience. Many of these questions were with regard to the Christian response to homosexuality. Thankfully, Moore continued to embrace his mantra of convictional compassion, an ethos Chandler has maintained as well during his ministry. Many in the room wanted to know how to share the gospel with those in a homosexual lifestyle without supporting homosexuality itself. 

## 9Marks @ 9 Panel

After dinner, I attended a final panel discussion for the day. Hosted by 9Marks Ministries, Mark Dever moderated Al Mohler, Danny Akin, and David Platt for a discussion on ecclesiology. In typical 9Marks fashion, this panel included many surveys of the audience from Mark and questions of the panel from the audience. I loved sitting on the front row and having fun with the men from whom I have learned much over the years.

## Southeastern Lunch

On Wednesday, all of the seminaries hosted alumni lunches. The Southeastern luncheon was at Camden Yards, home of the Orioles. Southeastern's event included yet another panel including Thom Rainer, Nathan Finn, Bruce Ashford, Danny Akin, Trillia Newbell, and moderated by Ed Stetzer. Honestly, I struggle to remember what was discussed in detail because this was my fifth panel in 36 hours! However, I did enjoy eating with friends and basking in what the Lord has done through Southeastern Seminary.

## Convention Booths

Finally, I must note the booths of the convention. I was overwhelmed at the space given for the booths, their number, and their quality. LifeWay had an entire store set up in the convention hall. After walking around the hall and seeing some old friends, I spent most of my time at the Southeastern and 9Marks booths. Our friends at 9Marks were gracious enough to give away many books throughout the SBC. Oddly enough, I spent enough time at the 9Marks booth that I was asked to man it for a few minutes while it was understaffed!

# Conclusion

I enjoyed my first annual meeting of the Southern Baptist Convention. I am grateful for the opportunity to have been a better-informed first attender through my SBC class professor and the many behind-the-scenes access we were given. Notably, a few themes were emphasized repeatedly throughout the convention: racial reconciliation and ethnic diversity, church planting and revitalization, evangelism, and mixed emotions regarding slipping membership and baptismal numbers. My own heart was warmed to see so many Southern Baptist officers and messengers passionate about such matters. This is why I am a Southern Baptist.

Looking around the convention hall, I remembered that I currently live in a theological and ecclesiological bubble. Faithful Christian leaders fill my seminary campus and my current church is the healthiest I have ever attended. Over the past years in seminary, I had forgotten about the normal state of so many of our SBC churches. In particular, attending the SBC reminded me of the world of ministry in which I may be entering in a few months. Despite the diverse cross-section of those at the SBC, seeing the messengers united in the gospel of Christ gives me hope for our convention. I believe this numerical crisis is really a separating of the wheat from the chaff. SBC numbers have been bloated for decades—it is time to admit to numerical reality. However, in an age when it is no longer convenient to be a Christian, even in many areas of the South, a “smaller” SBC will be a healthier SBC, joined together in one heart with one God for one gospel mission.
