---
title: Sanctified
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
description: "Sanctification, the progressive growth in holiness offers the Church a testimony to an individual's salvation. Current sanctification testifies to the past work of justification and the future work of glorification. Without each, there is no salvation."
keywords: [justify, sanctify, glorify]
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology II class at Southeaster Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: "What does it mean to be 'sanctified'?"
date: 2014-05-02T08:00-5:00
---

The word group *sanctus* (holy) is used in Christian language to denote three core concepts: (1) "sanctity" describes something that is holy or of ultimate importance, (2) "to sanctify" is to set something apart as holy, and (3) "sanctification" represents the process of sanctifying someone or something. Sanctity is a concept that is threaded throughout the Christian Scriptures. God sanctified by his glory the tent of meeting (Ex. 29:43). The Lord sanctifies Israel and all who keep his statutes (Ex. 31:13; Lev. 20:8). Even the LORD sanctifies himself (Lev. 10:3). Isaiah prophesies that the children of Jacob will sanctify the name of the Lord and the Holy One of Jacob (Isaiah 29:23). 

The theme of sanctification continues into the New Testament as well. In his high priestly prayer, Jesus prayed that his disciples would be sanctified in the truth of God's word (John 17:17). Paul speaks of an inheritance awaiting those who are sanctified (Acts 20:32; cf. Rom. 6:22). In Romans, Paul urges the church to become "slaves of righteousness leading to sanctification" (Rom. 6:19). Paul also declares that the Holy Spirit sanctifies acceptable offerings before God (Rom. 15:16). 

Despite all the varied usage of sanctified and sanctification in the Scripture (as described above), the remainder of the New Testament epistles centers these terms around two use cases: (1) those who are in Christ Jesus, that is, the Church, are "sanctified" and (2) those who are "sanctified" go through a process of "sanctification". Paul greets the church in Corinth as "those sanctified in Christ Jesus" (1 Cor. 1:2 [ESV]). In his second epistle to the Thessalonians, Paul teaches that the Spirit is the one who does the work of sanctification. However, the author of Hebrews states that Christians are "sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all" (Heb. 10:10) and "For by a single offering he has perfected for all time those who are being sanctified" (Heb. 10:14). 

Christians are sanctified once for all by the blood of Christ, but are being sanctified by the work of the Spirit. By Christ we are sanctified and by the Spirit we are being sanctified. Put differently, we are made holy by Christ and are being made holy by the Spirit. The work of Christ was completed once for all while the work of the Spirit is ongoing in the lives of believers. These two works (which are unified by the one will of God) can be captured in two different words: justification and sanctification. Justification captures the once-for-all, non-temporal process of being set apart for God (made holy, sanctified). Sanctification captures the ongoing process of becoming one who behaves as one set apart for God (being made holy, being sanctified). Additionally, glorification captures our future change from fallen creatures to remade creatures. 

Justification and sanctification can be combined with glorification to describe the whole of our salvation in the Godhead. The great work of salvation is made of these three components. All those who are saved are also justified, sanctified, and glorified and must participate in justification, sanctification, and glorification. Of these attributes of salvation, only sanctification is visible to others at the present time. While our future selves will be able to identify clearly those who are glorified, we have no such evidence for glorification nor justification. Only sanctification, the progressive growth in holiness offers the Church a testimony to an individual's salvation. Current sanctification testifies to the past work of justification and the future work of glorification. Without each, there is no salvation. Praise the Godhead, three in one, that God's unified will for salvation is fulfilled through the unique work of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
