---
title: "Revelation: Inspired and Inerrant"
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
description: "Even though he saw the Son in his majesty, Peter attests to the more certain witness of the Scripture—the prophetic word of Scripture is more certain than our very eyes."
keywords: [inspiration, inerrancy, revelation, prophet]
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology I class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: "How does 2 Peter 1:16ff inform our understanding of Scripture as revelation? You should discuss inspiration and inerrancy."
date: 2014-04-21T08:00-5:00
---

The apostle Peter enhanced our understanding of Scripture as revelation when he wrote his second epistle. In 2 Peter 1:16--21, the author explains,  "we have the prophetic word more fully confirmed" and "no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit." Peter makes these assertions in light of his own experience of witnessing the glorified Christ on the Mount of Transfiguration---"we ourselves heard this very voice borne from heaven, for we were with him on the holy mountain"! In light of his impending death, Peter explains that he is writing this letter of Scripture because his flock needs something they can rely upon as concrete apostolic teaching. Even though he saw the Son in his majesty, Peter attests to the more certain witness of the Scripture---the prophetic word of Scripture is more certain than our very eyes. 

Our Christian Scripture is reliable because it is inspired by the Holy Spirit and, therefore, without error. In order to define inspired, we must consider Peter's own description: "For no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit." One reading of this passage leads some (few?) to conclude that the human authors were mechanistically controlled by the Holy Spirit to produce the Scripture. Under this view, the man exerts no will and is merely used as a tool. While this view has a high view of inerrancy, it produces difficult problems such as the need for multiple Gospel witnesses and the difference in writing styles between authors.  

Others promote dynamic inspiration, in which the person is inspired by the Spirit to interpret and write about an experience. Under this view, the Spirit inspires ideas, prompting the human to write. However, this quickly leads to the view that the words of Scripture are not inspired, just the ideas behind the words. 

We, however, consider plenary verbal inspiration to be the proper view of the inspiration of Scripture---every word of the text is inspired; the whole made by parts and every part of the whole. Under this view, when the human author is "carried along by the Spirit", he still is cognizant of his own set of experiences and language. In fact, the Spirit utilizes the human authors communicative ability to divinely guide the words written. The words of the writer are simulataneously the words of God. 

With plenary verbal inspiration, we also affirm that the Holy Scriptures are without error because the very words are the words of God. God, being without error in himself, will always speak truthfully and without error. Inerrancy is the result of God moving and guiding men to be authors of texts in which they speak on behalf of God. Therefore, as Christian theologians, we do not have the responsibility of identifying which parts of the text are reliable---we know that the whole text is inspired and inerrant. We can rely on the story of this text because the text and writers were inspired by the Holy Spirit to tell us the story of God reconciling the world to himself through Jesus Christ.

Furthermore, God reconciles the world to himself through Jesus Christ, *according to the Scripture.* At many times, the Hebrew Bible is counted as Scripture by Jesus and the New Testament writers. However, this Hebrew Bible is not an Old Testament telling us about an old convenant that we should cast off because the Son of God became incarnate. Instead, the Old Testament is more aptly described as the "Gospel according to the Prophets", and the New Testament could be called, the "Gospel according to the Apostles". The Old Testament is necessary for believers today because it is a book about the new covenant in which we participate. Yes, the Old Testament includes the old covenant, but the new covenant has been God's intention from the beginning. Therefore, God used the prophets of the Old Testament to predict and explain the coming new covenant found in the Messiah.
