---
layout: post
title: "Humility: True Greatness"
image: 
    feature: /reviews/humility.jpg
description: "C. J. Mahaney's <i>Humility</i> offers practical advice that can be utilized by every Christian to do the hard work of moving toward humility."
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Andrew Davis' Pastoral Internship class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
category: reviews
tags: [seminary, fbc-durham]
published: false
---

<em>Humility: True Greatness</em>. By C. J. Mahaney. Multnomah, 2005, 176 pp., $11.85.

Reading C. J. Mahaney’s *Humility* felt like a timely, providential endeavor, because every chapter in this approachable book contained direct application for my personal life. Mahaney focuses the majority of his work on practical advice for growing in humility, preceded by a short theological examination of the importance and significance of humility. According to Mahaney, “Humility is honestly assessing ourselves in light of God’s holiness and our sinfulness” (p. 22). The opposite of humility is the sin of pride, which is “when sinful human beings aspire to the status and position of God and refuse to acknowledge their dependence upon Him” (p. 31). Therefore, Mahaney’s work is devoted to turning his readers (and himself) from the sin of pride to the virtue of humility.

Personally, I benefited most from Mahaney’s practical advice for turning from pride and toward humility. Pride is one of my besetting sins, so I found his advice useful and applicable throughout. Mahaney begins this major section with tips for orienting one’s morning toward humility, especially by having dedicated, God-oriented time set-aside at the start of the day. I have historically been a night owl; therefore, taking charge of my mornings has always been a struggle for me. However, I have been blessed recently that my wife and I are both attempting to get on the same (early) morning schedule. During this time I hope to follow Mahaney’s advice and begin my day (1) reflecting on the cross, (2) acknowledging my need for God, (3) expressing gratitude, and (4) memorizing Scripture Furthermore, the author encourages one to take special time to study and dwell upon God's greatness. Particularly, Mahaney encourages his readers to study (1) the attributes of God (especially his incommunicable attributes), (2) the doctrines of grace, and (3) the doctrine of sin. Indeed these all ought to be humility inspiring studies. As a seminary student who is taking *two* systematic theology classes this semester, I hope that my scholastic study would also result in exultation as I consider the greatness of our God and the wonders of his deeds.

Mahaney also advises the reader both to work to identify evidences of grace and to encourage others in the Lord. As the father of four children (some of whom come from hard places), I have found much lack in my own ability to identify evidences of grace in their lives or to encourage them properly; these chapters hit close to home. Mahaney rightly uses Paul’s letters to the broken churches as exemplary standards for finding evidences of grace despite sin and brokenness. Furthermore, the author does well to encourage each reader to open his eyes and see the evidence of God at work in other people’s lives by familiarizing himself with the fruit of the Spirit. Mahaney balances this well with the importance of correction, however, he identified my own personal struggle to encourage others: without the divine perspective cultivated by “identifying evidences of grace in those around us, . . . we’ll always tend to be critical and pessimistic in our attitude toward others” (p. 109). Similarly, Mahaney exhorts his readers to edify others with purposeful words, even by giving correction and grace simultaneously. Both in my heart and my home, I need to observe and discuss the evidences of grace in those around me while also consistently extending more grace toward them.

Finally, Mahaney rightly advises his readers to invite correction from others and respond humbly to trials. Living in a community of accountability is necessary to the task of inviting correction, but we must also receive well (and glean from) correction given by individuals who are incorrect in their overall assessment of us. Both pursuing and receiving criticism has been an important aspect of my parenting so far and will be even more critical if I am able to enter into pastoral ministry. Although correction itself can feel like a trial, Mahaney rightly identifies trials as a humbling experience. I especially benefited from his emphasis on maintaining God-centered prayer with a focus on salvation during such trials. Also of value are his exhortations to humbly rejoice and abstain from anger during trials.

Experience shows that it’s easy to fall into the sin of pride and difficult to exemplify the virtue of humility. However, Mahaney’s book offers practical advice that can be utilized by every Christian to do the hard work of moving toward humility. I was privileged to read all of the practical chapters in one sitting and greatly benefited from the experience. I highly recommend this text to all Christians as an introduction to applied humility.

Buy it from Amazon: [Hardcover](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1590523261/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1590523261&linkCode=as2&tag=pja-20) · [Kindle](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001E2NXDE/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B001E2NXDE&linkCode=as2&tag=pja-20)