---
layout: post
title: "Record or Revelation?"
category: posts
tag: seminary
description: "The purpose of Scripture is not to recreate historical events, historical though they are, but to reveal God to the saints for the ages."
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology I class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: "Is the Bible the record of revelation or is it the revelation of God?"
keywords: [theology, revelation, Bible, Scripture]
---

Our God has chosen to reveal himself in many times and in many ways. In the garden, God walked with Adam and Eve in the cool of the day. Throughout the history of Israel, God spoke directly to the fathers, leaders, priests, and prophets. God even spoke directly to all of Israel after the Exodus. Eventually, the Son of God himself came down to earth, incarnated as a mere human. This God-man, Jesus, is the ultimate revelation of God because he is the visible image of the invisible God. Jesus went on to live a perfect life, teaching those who would follow him, and sacrificing himself for the sins of the world. Upon his resurrection, Jesus fully revealed himself and the nature of the Messiah to his disciples and, later, sent the Holy Spirit to dwell within men as a seal of their inheritance. All this and more is captured in the Bible, the written Word of God, which leads to the current question: "Is the Bible the record of revelation or is it the revelation of God?"

Any answer to this question requires nuance. In a very real sense, the Bible is both the record of God's revelation to others and the direct revelation of God to us today. As mentioned above, the Bible sometimes describes God's revelation of himself to others. Any narrative of Jesus is a description of his revelation; the Law is a record of the revelation of God to Moses; the Book of Revelation describes John's experience in receiving God's direct revelation. However, as recipients of Scripture, the Bible is the direct revelation of God to us. 

The meaning of Scripture is not found in recreating the events described in the Bible; rather, meaning is found in the text itself. One does not need to reimagine Moses' receipt of the decalogue in order to benefit from God's revelation to Moses, one need only to read the inspired text, rightly interpreted by the aid of the Spirit, in order to know God's direct revelation. Scripture, which is God's direct revelation to us, provides *one* perspective, *one* account of the God's revelation to Moses. This one account is the account by which we are to understand God's revelation to Moses. After the exodus, do you think the Israelites rightly interpreted the events going on around them (including the direct revelation of God)? No! After God revealed himself to them, the Israelites quickly responded . . . by fashioning bovine idols. Clearly, they did not rightly interpret the events before them. Furthermore, each Israelite had a unique perspective of the events going on around them. The one account of Scripture is God's revelation to us, not any of the potential perspectives of those in attendance, because they would be the *wrong* account. 

Scripture is God's revelation of himself to us today and includes descriptions of his revelation of himself to others in the past. Being transported to the past in order to observe the original events would not provide us with a clearer understanding of the Scripture, because the purpose of Scripture is to reveal what God intends, from God's perspective. The purpose of Scripture is not to recreate historical events, historical though they are, for God is not revealed by history but through his revelation. God works in time and space, and even reveals himself to individuals in time and space, but his revelation to the saints for the ages is the text of Scripture itself. Indeed, if Scripture was merely a description of his former revelation to others, then we would not have direct access to his revelation of himself. Praise God that he has revealed himself to us today directly through his Scripture!
