---
title: The Work of the Spirit
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology II class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: Describe the Holy Spirit's work in conversion.
description: "The Spirit brings to completion all stages of conversion in an individual believer's life. This Spirit, who brought to effect both justification and sanctification, will also bring about future glorification—the resurrection of the dead to newness of life."
keywords: [faith, indwelling, spirit, work, God, ]
date: 2014-05-30T08:00-4:00
---

The Person of the Holy Spirit participates in the work of God in the role of effector. As God, he works alongside the other Persons of the Trinity in order to bring to completion the work of God. The Holy Spirit fulfills this role in all of the five-fold work of God. The Spirit's work is tied to the gospel. The promise and power of the Spirit is focused on the gospel. Scripture identifies the Spirit's work as relating to the gospel---the ultimate culmination of God's work. In Luke 24, Jesus preached that repentance and forgiveness will be preached and the promise of the Spirit will come. The promise of the Spirit must be tied to the progress of the gospel. When discussing the Spirit's role in the progress of the gospel, we are concerned with every part of the gospel story and conversion.

The Spirit brings to completion all stages of conversion in an individual believer's life. In justification, the work of the Spirit is to bring the individual into participation with the Son's death and resurrection. The Spirit does the work of uniting an individual man with God himself, thus making the man right with God. In his conversation with Nicodemus in John 3, Jesus taught that one must be born again by the Spirit in order to have life. Birth gives life; in order to enter the kingdom, one must have new life by being born again. One must be born of water and spirit---this points back to Genesis 1:2 in creation and Genesis 6 in the Noahic flood. When one is born of water and Spirit, God is granting eternal life. The Spirit's work in the believer is the gift of life. Through this gift of life, the Spirit re-establishes our relationship with God. One can participate in Jesus' reunification of God and humanity through the effectual work of the Spirit. The salvation of human beings is the righteousness of God supplanting the unrighteousness of men, through the work of the Spirit.

Furthermore, the Spirit comes to indwell the individual believer. Jesus describes the Spirit as the Helper (John 14:15). However, the Spirit not only indwells the individual believer, but every believer, and therefore grows the whole body of Christ into a dwelling place for God (Ephesians 2:22). The Spirit indwells the individual persons, but also the entire church, which is collectively the temple of the Holy Spirit. Christians know the presence of God through the Spirit. The Spirit also works in the life of the church through spiritual giftings, thus enabling the church to fulfill the common purpose of proclaiming the gospel. Spiritual gifts are not given for individual fulfillment, but for the inward and outward progress of the gospel.

This indwelling Spirit teaches and brings to remembrance all of what Jesus and his disciples taught through the Spirit-inspired Scriptures (1 John 3--5). By abiding in the Spirit, converted individuals can abide in the Scriptures, and work out the fruit of conversion. This fruit of conversion is life by the Spirit. Before conversion, an individual is a slave to sin; however, through conversion, one dies to sin and becomes alive to Christ, by the work of the Spirit. Just as one is converted and justified by faith through the efficacy of the indwelling Spirit, one becomes sanctified by faith through the efficacy of the indwelling spirit. Within the life of a believer, the Spirit works by faith, growing the person in living the life of God. One is made righteous by the indwelling Spirit and one grows in the fruit of righteous living by faith through the Spirit. 

As those dead to sin and alive to Christ, Christians can live a life of faith, by the indwelling Spirit, thus walking in the newness of life. This Spirit, who brought to effect both justification and sanctification, will also bring about future glorification---the resurrection of the dead to newness of life. Just as the Spirit raised Jesus from the dead, the Spirit will raise up all persons of the church to dwell in the recreated heavens and earth in the full presence of the Triune Godhead.


