---
title: "Could Jesus Sin?"
category: posts
tag: seminary
description: "Jesus did not sin; Jesus would not sin; Jesus refused to sin; and, ultimately, Jesus could not sin, for he cannot deny himself."
keywords: [Jesus, sin, tempt, opportunity]
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology II class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: Could Jesus have sinned?
---

While all Christian theologians affirm that Jesus did not sin, the question remains, "Was it possible for Jesus to sin?" While this question may seem esoteric, the manner in which one articulates Jesus' relationship to sin has implications on Jesus' very nature. Although Jesus did not sin, would it have been possible to do so? Could Jesus have rebelled against the will of the Father?

Jesus is God in the flesh, the incarnated Word of God. Jesus is fully God and fully man, residing in a body, but not limited by it. As Paul wrote to the Philippians, "Though he was in the form of God . . . [Jesus] emptied himself, by taking the form of a servant" (Phil. 2:7 [ESV]). Similarly, he wrote, "though he was rich, yet for your sake he became poor, so that you by his poverty might become rich" (2 Cor. 8:9 [ESV]). Jesus emptied, lowered, and humbled himself by taking on the form (body) of man and dwelling in it. However, Jesus was still able to perform supernatural miracles. He had access to his divine nature while still in the form of man. By becoming a man, the Son of God did not shed his divinity; he was more than a mere human---he was (and is) the Christ, the Son of God.

This Jesus, God in the flesh, received a human form and nature through his incarnation. While our human nature is fallen and tainted by sin, Jesus' was made perfect by his divine nature and his perfect communion with the Father. However, we also know that Jesus "in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin" (Heb. 4:15 [ESV]). What is the nature of temptation for the God-man? As Jesus suffered every kind of temptation, he was given opportunity to sin. For each trial, Jesus had to choose whether to obey or deny the will of the Father. In order for his temptation to be like ours, this choice must have been real---surely it involved an actual opportunity to sin. 

However, Jesus' opportunity to sin does not demand that he had an equivalent ability to sin. For example, one may be given the opportunity to run a marathon without having the ability to finish the race. Opportunity does not necessitate ability. If Jesus was given opportunity to sin, but had no ability to sin, does that mean he is incapable of something? If so, then Jesus would be incapable of performing a simple task that all humans so easily accomplish every day. Saying that Jesus is unable to sin misrepresents the virtue and ability of Jesus. Put positively, Jesus was fully able to perfectly obey the will of his Father by conforming his own will to the will of the Father. Jesus perfectly obeyed the Father's will because his own will was identical to his Father's! Even more, Jesus' will flows from the will of the Father because Jesus and the Father are of the same essence and nature. Jesus' very will is to do the will of the Father. 

Sin occurs when one acts contrary to the will of the Father. As the Son of God, Jesus was tempted with the opportunity to sin while having the perfect ability to obey his own will, which was to do the will of the Father. For Jesus to sin would require him to go against the will of Father, against his own will, against his perfect ability to accomplish his own will, and against his own divine nature. Therefore, Jesus did not sin; Jesus would not sin; Jesus refused to sin; and, ultimately, Jesus could not sin, for he cannot deny himself.
