---
title: Imago Dei
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
description: "Although every human reflects the image of God, and must be given due dignity, we do not all reflect God's image rightly. Only by participating by faith in the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus, can we fully bear the image of God."
keywords: [Adam, Eve, "image of God", create, Seth]
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology I class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: What does it mean that Adam and Eve were made in the image of God?
date: 2014-04-30T08:00-5:00
published: false
---

At the pinnacle of the creation narrative, on the sixth day, "God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them" (Gen. 1:27 [ESV]). We know from Genesis 2 that the specific people God created were the man and his wife, Adam and Eve. We also know that both the male and the female were created in the image of God, for the "man" at the beginning of verse 27 represents mankind, while the "male" and "female" at the end of the verse represent the first individuals. 

Adam and Eve were created in the image of God; however, they were not God or gods themselves. Mankind was created in the likeness of God, as a reflection of him. Just as an image (or an idol) is not the same as its object, it captures and reflects aspects of the object, while maintaining certain aspects of its own nature. Whereas a painting of a tree may look like a tree, it will not smell like a tree because it is not a tree; furthermore, it will not grow, bear fruit, and reproduce like a tree, but will remain in place. Similarly, mankind was created to reflect aspects of God. Man's creativity reflects the true Creator; man's intellect reflects the Omniscient One; man's love reflects the unified love of the Trinity. However, man is physical, whereas God is spirit; man matures over time, whereas God never changes; man has the capacity for sin, whereas God cannot sin and deny himself; man has a beginning, whereas God is eternal.

Subsequent to being created in the image of God, the first man and woman chose to sin. Given the consequence of the fall and groaning of all creation, we must consider how Adam and Eve's sin may have affected their ability to bear the image of God. In the genealogies of Genesis 5:1--3, we are reminded that man was created in the image of God.[^1] God created man in his own image and the first man fathered a son in his own image. Just as Seth was not the same as his father, he reflected attributes of Adam. Seth was made in the image of Adam and Adam was made in the image of God. Despite the fall, the image of God was passed down from father to son, from Seth to Adam.[^2]

[^1]: The "image of God" of Genesis 1:27 and the "likeness of God" of Genesis 5:1 appear to be synonyms, which is further substantiated in Genesis 5:3: "he fathered a son in his own likeness, after his image".

[^2]: This is further supported by James 3:9 which asserts that contemporary people are made in the likeness of God.

We are still bearers of the image of God. However, not all people seem to reflect the image of God to the same degree. For instance, while we are made "in the image of God", Jesus Christ "is the image of God" (2 Cor. 4:4). Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God made man, is the perfect image of God because he is God. Jesus is the visible image of the invisible God (Col. 1:15). Just as Jesus perfectly reflects the image of God, God has called us to put off our old selves and "to put on the new self, created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness" (Eph. 4:17). Although every human reflects the image of God, and must be given due dignity, we do not all reflect God's image rightly. Only by participating by faith in the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus can we fully bear the image of God.
