---
layout: post
title: "(Un?)Limited Atonement"
category: posts
tag: seminary
description: The redeeming work of Christ is unlimited in power and totally effective for those who respond in faith.
keywords: [elect, salvation, atonement, redemption, limited, unlimited, particular, general]
context: The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Steven McKinion's Christian Theology II class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.
intro: Did Jesus atone for the sins of every person, or just those who become Christians?
date: 2014-02-28T08:00-5:00
---

Recently, I came across a question on a pastoral application asking if I affirmed limited or unlimited atonement. The form defined limited atonement as "the view that Christ’s atoning death was only for the elect" and defined unlimited atonement as "a view of the atonement that Christ’s redemptive death is available to all persons." Does such a church properly understand the theological question in view? As Christians, we reject universalism, the idea that all human individuals will ultimately be saved. Even though the gospel message is freely given to all men, some will respond with faith and so be saved, while others will reject God and die in their sins. Considering that salvation wholly effective, but limited in extent to those who believe, how ought we to consider the similar extent and efficacy of Christ’s atoning work on the cross?  

Particular redemption (often referred to as "limited atonement") is the theological conclusion that Christ’s death was totally effective at redeeming the sins of particular individuals. Because Christ’s righteousness is imputed to those who are redeemed, the extent of his atonement is limited to those who are saved, namely, the universal Church. Paul explained to the Ephesians that, before God created the world, he predestined the elect to be adopted as sons through Jesus Christ (Eph. 1:4–5). As Christians, we have received "redemption through [Christ’s] blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace" (Eph. 1:7 [ESV]). Those whom God chose, he redeemed by the blood of Christ, and adopted as sons so they may receive a glorious inheritance, to the praise of his glory (cf. Eph. 1:11)! Even our act of faith, which is required for salvation, is given to us as the gift of God and is not a result of works (Eph. 2:8–9). We who have been redeemed have been saved by grace through God’s own gift of faith. God’s power in salvation is totally effective; those whom he has redeemed will express the requisite faith because it will be given to them. Our faith is not the result of our own work, but is the work and gift of God himself. 

As finite humans, we are unaware of whom God has particularly redeemed. Many who are currently outside the Church will come to faith and become affirmed members of the visible church. Others who are currently visible in churches may indeed walk away from the faith and thus reveal themselves to be unregenerate and unredeemed. Therefore, we must affirm meaningful membership and discipline within our churches in order to protect the sheep from the wolves (cf. Matt. 7:15; Matt. 18:15–20). Furthermore, we must proclaim the message of Christ’s redemption to the whole world because whoever hears the gospel of salvation, and believes in him, will be sealed with the promised Holy Spirit and not perish, but have everlasting life (cf. Eph. 1:13; John 3:16). We must reach the nations with the gospel because the Lord desires that all should come to repentance, that none should perish (2 Pet. 3:9). 

Christ died to redeem those whom God elected before the foundation of the world. The redeeming work of Christ is unlimited in power and totally effective for those who respond in faith. Indeed, God, who is rich in mercy, provides the very faith that is necessary for his adopted children to respond to the gospel of salvation. Because of his love for the world, God even sets forth good works in which the redeemed partake, including the proclamation of the gospel message to the ends of the earth. Praise God that Christ’s atonement and redemption is wholly effective for all who respond to the gospel message with the gift of faith! 
